                             THE
ISLAND OF CUBA,
          BY
       ALEXANDER HUMBOLDT.
                                     QtatsIaieJ) from ftt Spantsi,
jpantj
/
                                  WITH
        NOTES AND A PRELIMINARY ESSAY.'
                          BY
                         J. S. THRASHER.
                             NEW YORK:
              DERBY & JACKSON, 119 NASSAU STREET.
       ,        CINCINNATI :—n. W. DERBY.
                                        1856.
 -ST
                Entbued according to Act of Congress, jn the year 1865, by.
                               J. C . DERBY,
   In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the U. S. for tho Southern District of New York,
 * *
 .*/
. i                                              LtL, Pl/3? 
           \S9<?                                         F; 
                                               P: 35V" Us & 
                             ,                              
W, 11. XfKsON, Stereotype!-. ' Puonkv & Russicll, Printers. 
  *>
                                  TO
   <5jit BU'ibrs b tjit toman
                         THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY
                         DEDICATED,
           IN GRATEFUL ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THEIR SYMPATHY AND PROTECTION
           IN A TIME OF PERIL,
                  BY THEIR OBLIGED OOLABOR8R,
                                J. S. THRASHER.
              PREFACE.
       That portion of Baron Humboldt’s “ Personal Narrative ” of his
    travels with Mons. Bonpland in the equinoctial regions of America,
    which relates to the Island of Cuba, has been published as a separate
    work both in the French and Spanish languages; but I believe' no
    complete version has ever boon presented in English. The following
    translation is from an excellent rendering of the original work into
    Spanish, which modestly gives only the initials of the translator;
    D. J. B. de V. Y. M.
       I have been stimulated to undertake this labor by the oft-repeated
    request that I would state which is the best book on Cuba, and by
    the fact that a long continued residence in the island, and a study
    of its condition and resources, have convinced me that Baron
    Humboldt’s work is the best that ha9 been, written on the subject.
       In order to bring the information in this volume as nearly as
    possible down to the present time, I have added notes, which are
    placed in brackets in the body of the text, or without signature at
    the foot of the page, as seemed most conducive to a clear exposition
    of the present condition of Cuba. The notes of Baron Humboldt
    have the signature H. affixed in the following pages.
          New Yorh* December y 1855.
                                                                     J. S. T.
                CONTENTS.
 Preliminary Essay
paoh
  13
                                      CHAPTER I.
                                      general views.
 Political importance of the islarnl of Cuba and port of Havana
   —Their relations to contiguous countries—Increase of public
   wealth and revenue—Description of Bay and City of Havana-
   Public buildings—Streets—Public walks and grounds—Ashes
   of Columbus—Palms—Vicinity of Havana—Suburbs—Projected
   moat—Defences of Havana—Population—Increase—Marriages,
   births, and deaths—Hospitals—Health—Markets—Hospitality—
   [Note.—Establishment of Navy yard at Havana—Don Augustin
   de Arriola—List of ships built at Havana—Abandonment of the
   Navy-yard]......................................    97
                      CHAPTER II.
                   PnTSlCAL ASTEOT.
  Figure of the island but lately known—Area according toLiadencau
    and Ferrer—According to Bauza—According to u Cuadro Ivda-
    diflticov—Comparative area—Length and width—Importance of
vi
                       CONTENTS.
   Batabano—Comparative territorial power—Geological character
   —Mountains—Face of the country—Elevation—Noted hills—
   Eastern portion—Gold-washing—Formation of western and cen-
   tral portion—Guinea—Soil—Hills of San Juan—Caverns—Modern
   formation—Shore at Havana—Roaring banks explained—Relative
   age of strata—Fresh water on the cays—Origin—Vicinity of
   Havana — Guanabacoa — Serpentine — Petroleum — Botany of
   Cuanabacoa—Mineral springs—Reflections on geology — Earth-
   quakes—Fertile lands—Beauty of vegetation—Soils, how distin-
   guished—Rivers—Springs—Lands near Havana. [Note.—Imper-
   fect Btate of geological knowledge in Cuba—Known metal and
   mineral productions—Coal analyzed—Celebrated mineral springs
   —Analysis of tobacco lands in the Vuelta de Abajo].  124
                        CHAPTER m.
                           CLIMATE.
 General remarks—Mean temperature—Means of heat and cold—
   Summer solstice—Peculiarities of winter—Compared with Macao
   and Rio Janeiro—Fires not needed—Hail—General remarks
   —Anomalies of vegetation—The pine of Cuba—Identity with that
   of Mexico—Temperature in the interior and at Havana—Compari-
   son with Cumana—Ice—Snow never seen in Cuba—Sudden changes
   at Havana—Internal heat of the earth—Oscillations of thermome-
   ter and barometer connected—Barometrical altitudes—Hurricanes
   —[Note.—Hurricanes of 1844 and 1845—Rain gauge and Hygro-
   meter-Atmospherical phenomena—Cloudy and fair days—Effect
   of climate on vegetation]............................. 150
                        CHAPTER IV.
                          GEOGRAPHY.
 Banks and reefs round Cuba—North coast—South coast—Territorial
   divisirT 1 — JudHary—Ecclesiastical — Politico-military— Public
                      CONTENTS.
vii
   Finances—Proposed new division—Present dividing line of bish-
   oprics—Number of parishes—Popular territorial divisions—First
   governor—[Note, Maritime subdivision].............. 174
                       CHAPTER V.
                        POPULATION.
 Its political importance—Former census—Population in 1825
   —Compared with other Antilles—Relative proportions of races
   in slave countries—Reflections—Why slaves have not dimin-
   ished since 1820—Proportions of free, and slaves, and of
   sexes—Fears on cessation of slave trade—Why unfounded—
   Distribution of population in 1811—Free colored seek the towns
   —Relative density—Census of 1775—Of 1791—Their contradic-
   tions—Corrections—Motion in Spanish Cortes for abolition of
   slavery—Remonstrance from Cuba—Census of 1817—Is not com-
   plete—Mode of estimating increase—Relative increase of classes
   —Several causes of increase—Rate—Excessive between 1791 and
   1810—Unequal distribution of classes—[Note.—Censuses of 1827,
   1841, and 1846—Reasons for distrusting that of 1846—Supposed
   decrease of slaves—Its improbability—Reasons therefor—Increase
   of slaves—Annual rate of total increase—Present population] 183
                       CHAPTER VL
                          SLAVERY.
 Manumission frequent in Cuba—Its causes—Slaves allowed to hire
   their time.—[Note—Usual wages—Number of working days—
   Slaves may purchase their freedom by partial payments—-Many
   remain partially redeemed — Reason — Curious phase of negro
   mind.]—Position of free negroes—Mild laws—Slaves previous to
   the Eighteenth century—Religious scruples regarding females—
   Population of Sugar plantations—Projects for increasing slaves'
CONTENTS.
   viii
     —Don Francisco de Arango—Desire to ameliorate their condition
     —First importation—Entire importation to America in sixteenth
     century—Slaves in Cuba in 1763—Activity of trade at the close
     of the eighteenth century—Treaty with England.—[Note—Total
     number imported.]—Compared with Jamaica — Other English
     colonies {Note)—Humane result in Cuba—Mortality of slaves—
     Has diminished—Of newly imported negroes—Means to prevent
     decrease—Abolition of slave-trade.—[Note—Not effective—Baron
     Humboldt’s sketch of slavery in Cuba—Decrease of slaves a fal-
     lacy-increase only paralleled in United States—Their well-being
     evident — Chinese imported — Injurious influence and evil
     results]........................................... 211
                        CHAPTER Vn.
                             RACES.
   But two now in the Antilles—Indians have disappeared—Confusion
   of early historians relative to their numbers—Character of
   9 estimates by early voyagers—Why Cuba might not have been
   as populous as represented—Cruelties of first settlers—Early
   mode of computing population—Movement of colonization iu
   Cuba—Law of proportion of races—Havana—Cuatro Villas—
   Puerto Principe—St. Jago de Cuba—Density of population
   —Populous and uninhabited districts—Impossibility of the mili-
   tary defence of the island—Intellectual culture—Intelligence
   of the Habaneros—Apparent distance from Europe diminished—
   Declining influence of the old Spaniards—Admirable institutions in
   Havana—The necessity of reform....................    232
                        CHAPTER VIII.
                         SUGAR CULTURE.
                            Historical summary—Export of sugar from Havana' to 1824—
                            From Cuba to 1852—Estimates of actual product—Wealth of
                     CONTENTS,
ix

  Cuba compared with the Antilles—St. Domingo—Brazil—Effect
  of political disasters on prices—Relative position of Cuba —
  Classes of sugi^r—Numerical elements of sugar planting—Value
  of land—Number of hands to a plantation, and their food—Machi-
  nery—Cost, product, and expense of a sugar plantation in 1825
  —[Note—In 1855—Compared—Causes of increased product.]—
  Moan yield of land in sugar-cane, maple, and beet—Proportions of
  crystallizable sugar—Different results in manipulations of cane-
  j uice—Where improvements must be sought—Yield of cane in
  new and old lands—Compared with wheat—Yield in Bengal—
  Disproportion of results in agriculture in Cuba and France—First,
  beet-root sugar in Havana—Fears entertained—Changes in sugar
  culture—Increase—First cane planted in America—Several classes
  —Supposition of sugar-makers—Otaheitan cane has not degenerated
  —Want of fuel—Application of bagass—AVood and bagass com-
  pared—Experiments and inventions—Suggested by the author’s
  residence at salt-works—Error in Europe relative to the effect of
  cessation of slave-trade—Number of slaves in sugar culture—In
  towns—Capture of Havana by the English, and its good effects—
  Causes of prosperity—Evils of government embarrass it_ 250
                      CHAPTER IX.
                       AGRICULTURE.
Increase of tithes, an evidence of prosperity—Table of agricultura
wealth—Hatos and Potreros (Note)—Pecuniary relations of plant
ers and merchants—Rate of interest—Slave-trade—Coffee planting
—Product—Yield per hand-compared with sugar—[Note.-*
Decline of coffee planting—Causes.]—Tobacco planting—Former
monopoly—Product—Decline—Factoria — Prices—Quantity pur
chased, and where sold—Expenses of Factoria—State of tobacov
planting, in 1820-5—[Note.—Obstacles to tobacco planting—
Future prospects—Present product—Prices—Error of Baron Hum-
boldt-Probable causes of superiority of the tobacco from the
X
                                 CONTENTS.

    Vuclta de Majo.]—Other products in Cuba—Wheat—Wine-
    Wax....................................   278
                                   CHAPTER X.
                                     COMMERCE.
   Causes of its importance—Wealth of Cuba—Relation of Havana to ■
   Spanish-Amcrica—Present state of commerce—Official valuations
   (Note)—Fallacies of tables of trade—Remarks thereon—
   Balanza de Comercio—Imports and exports, 1816 and 1823—
   Character of imports—Of exports—Merchant ships and men-of-
   war at Havana—[Note.—Imports and exports. 1852—Character
   of imports, and proportion from United States—Exports—Propor-
   tion to the United States—Vessels entered and cleared—Propor-
   tion of commerce of Havana.]—Reflections on the character of
   importations—Large amount of woven fabrics—Of provisions and
   liquors—State of society, and want of subsistence—Wines and
   cereals a necessity—Surprising importation of meats and pulse—
   Probable future deduced—Error of the deduction (Note)—Evil
   colonial policy of Europe—Not adapted to Cuba—Probable
   increase of population—Social theory—Law of public welfare
   and of future of Cuba—[Note.—Error of social theory demon-
   strated by Jamaica—Transition of blacks from slavery to freedom
   —Its sad results—Tendency of free negroes to abandon the fields
   —Natural results—Sustains Baron Humboldt’s law of public
   welfare and of future of Cuba.]—Flour trade—Mexican competi-
   tion—State of public wealth in 1800—Its increase—Cuban defence
   of free trade—Influence of commerce upon society—Progress not
   to be measured by /ons—Lives of nations.............. 294
                                  CHAPTER XI.
                              INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
                            Projected canal from Havana to Batabano—Survey and levels—
                            Difficulty of making roaids—Estimated cost and advantages of the
CONTENTS.
 xi
   Canal—[Note.—Present state of roads—Itinerary of principal
   roads—Cross-roads—Turnpikes—Introduction of railroads—Their
   adaptability to Cuba—Government determines to build the first—
   Its immense cost—Receipts and expenses—Sale and extension-
   present system of railroads—Existing railroads in Cuba—Their
   cost—Receipts—Steam navigation—Coasting trade—Shipbuilding
   —Telegraph]........................................   315
                    1 CHAPTER XU.
                        REVENUE.
 Historical sketch—Its comparatively large amount—Causes of great
expenditure—Struggle with the Spanish republics—Mistaken
policy of Spain—Customs revenue of Havana, 1789 to 1822—
Detail of revenue, 1824—Increase—Internal taxes, 1735 to 1818
—Revenue and expenditure, 1822—Comments of the Intendent—
Subsidies from Mexico to Cuba—[Note.—Sources of present
• revenue examined—Maritime revenue and tariff—Internal taxes—
Direct revenue—State property—Declared revenue—Items of
government income to be added—Total revenue—Abuses in Cuba
Evil effects of the revenue system—Appropriations—Civil list—
Army—Navy—Crown income—Average product to Spain—Per-
centage on official incomes—Revenue from 182G to 1852—Com-
pared with revenue of Spanish government in Mexico—
Reflections].......................................  328
                      CHAPTER XHI.
                    A TUTP TO TRINIDAD.
 Change of plans—Preparations for departure—Remission of Spcci-
    mens to Europe—Long absence without letters—Joyful news—
    Difficulties to be surmounted—Objections met—Charter of a
    schooner—Financial arrangements—Departure—Grateful acknow-
                                        1*
CONTENTS.
                                                                                      XI1
      ledgracnts—The Orleans princes—Road across the island—Cot-
   ton plant—Batabano—Supposed encroachments' of the sea—
   Gloom of the marshes—Cocodrilos and Caymans—Their habits
   and characteristics—Specimens—Comparison with those of South
   America—Suggestions—Dampier’s description of them—Embar-
   cation—Discomfort on board—Gulf of Batabano—Isle of Pines
   —Jardines and Jardinillos—Struggle of Columbus here^-Beauti-
   ful phenomenon—Temperatures of the sea—Clearness of the water
   —Cause thereof—Incompetency of pilot—Anchor at night—
   Multitude of shooting-stars—Absence of life in these regions—
   Contrast with the time of Columbus—Arts of the Indian fisher-
   men—Similar arts among other uncivilized nations—Visit to the
   Cays—Their geognostic constitution—Does the sea grow shallow
   here—Cay Bonito—Pelicans—Barbarity of the sailors—Vegeta-
   tion—Charm of these regions—Memories of Columbus and Cort6s
   Columbus and the natives—Fleets of pirogues from Yucatan—
   Hopes of Columbus—His remarkable vision—His pathetic com-
   plaints—Ilernan CortSs—Stranding of his ship—Gathering of his
   fleet—Fall of Mexico—Strange vicissitudes—Cay Flamenco-
   Fresh water on the Cays—Springs in the sea—Similar springs at
   Cardenas—The Manatee—Dampier’s description of it—Cay de
   Piedras—The open sea—Its temperature—Marshy coast—Las
   Casas grant of Indians—Bay of Jagua—Cienfuegos—Hills of San
   Juan—A bold coast—Mexican wax found in Cuba—River San.
   Juan-—Remains of native inhabitants—Sea temperature—Arrival
   at the river Guaurabo—Ludicrous conveyance to the city—■
   Trinidad—Absence of snow—First settlement—Fine view—Astro-
   nomical observations—Hospitality—Dinner given by the governor
   —Complaints of the inhabitants—Ports of Trinidad, Guaurabo—
   •Casilda—An agreeable evening—Cuban ladies—Departure from
   Trinidad—Stately conveyance—Fire-flies—Interesting anecdote
   —Conclusion. •....................•....................... 350
         PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
     An essay upon the Island of Cuba, without some
    treatment of the political and social questions which
    affect its present condition and future develop-
    ment, would justly be deemed an unsatisfactory
    and incomplete work. We do not presume to
    bring to the subject anything like the clear precision,
    and charm of thought and style, which the admirable
    writer and traveller, Baron Humboldt, has thrown
    round the production we have ventured to reproduce
    . in the translation which follows. But we have made
    these questions the subject of study for several years,
    under new aspects which have developed themselves
    since Humboldt wrote, and venture to offer the result,
    of our observations and reflections, in the hope that
    they may supply an existing want, and prove inter-
    esting and serviceable to the American reader.
                       The complete view of the population and industrial
                       . condition of Cuba, presented in the work of Baron
                       Humboldt, renders unnecessary any further remarks
      14                humboldt’s  cub  a.
      upon that subject. We shall, therefore, limit the
      considerations we have to offer, to four heads, which
      are: .1. The Territorial; II. The Political; III. The
      Industrial; and IV. The Social relations of Cuba, as
      they exist at the present time.
        I. The' territorial relations of the Island of Cuba,
      are of a more marked and permanent character than
      those of any other country of limited extent in
      America, and justify the Abbe Raynal’s assertion
      that it is u the boulevard of the New World.” The
      peculiar formation of the eastern shore of this conti-
      nent, and the prevalence in the Caribbean Sea of the
      trade winds, which blow with great uniformity from
      the E.N.E., with a constant oceanic current running
      in its general direction, from east to west, make the
      narrow ocean passages, which skirt the shore of
      Cuba, the natural outlets for the commerce of Vene-
      zuela, New Granada, the isthmus States of Panama,
      Costa Pica, Honduras, San Salvador, and Nicaragua.
        The rich and growing commerce with the coun-
      tries bordering upon the Pacific Ocean, crossing the
      several routes of isthmus transit, is brought by these
      natural influences, under the immediate supervision
      and control of the fleets that ride in safety, in the
      numerous large and well-protected harbors of Cuba.
      The value of the territorial advantages thus conferred
      by its geographical position, must increase in the
                                                     PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
15
  same ratio with the increase of trade across the
  various isthmus routes, and every new enterprise in
  those regions has a direct and practical tendency to
  increase the moral power of whatever government
  rules in Cuba. The construction of the Panama
  railroad, at the cost of millions of dollars to the
  industrial resources of the United States, although of
  great advantage, in a pecuniary sense, to all the
  nations upon whose commerce it has conferred a
  benefit, has brought an increase of national power
  only to the Spanish government in Cuba, as it has
  brought a great increase to the tides of national
  wealth which must pass before its doors, and within
  its easy grasp. The same result must attend every
  increased facility of transit across the isthmus States,
  and every movement which shall tend to augment
  the products of labor within their borders, or their
  intercourse with the great marts lying upon the
  North Atlantic Ocean.
     The physical geography of all the isthmus states
   north of Panama, and of the republic of Mexico,
   give to Cuba in this respect, a peculiar natural terri-
   torial relation to all those countries. Their eastern
   shores are wanting in those deep and capacious har-
   bors, so necessary not only for commerce, but for the
   purposes of defence, while the situation of Cuba,
   with her numerous ports, opposite, and almost imme-
      16                iiumroldt’s cifba.
      diately contiguous to tlieir coasts, points to her as
      tho natural depository for tlieir productions, and the
      scene of their commercial exchanges with the rest of
      the world. ‘
        This natural relation is augmented by the physical
      aspect of the countries in question. Traversed as
      they are, through their whole extent, by chains of
      mountains, tho construction of long lines of internal
      communication, which shall concentrate their trade
      upon any point within their own territory, is of very
      difficult and costly attainment, and Cuba thus 'be-
      comes the probable channel of their future inter-
      course with the nations north and east of them.
      Though the value of this natural connection may
      now seem small, their mineral wealth, and vast
      tracts of fertile soil under a genial climate, indicate
      a great increase of importance at no very distant
      day, under the natural development of the progress
      of America.
        The Gulf of Mexico, with a shore line of nearly
      six thousand miles, forms almost an exact circle, the
      great ocean outlet to which is through the narrow
      passage running along the northern shore of Cuba,
      and within a few miles of her best and strongest har-
      bors. This formation of the land and sea, brings the
      rich mineral tribute paid by Mexico to Europe, and
      the bulky products of the region drained by the Mis-
                     PRELIMINARY ESSAY.                17
   sissippi river and its tributaries,, within tho control-
   of the government of Cuba. It may close at will
   the only ocean outlet those countries possess, and
   thus inflict great evils upon all their industrial inter-
   ests. The actual value of the commerce which that
   vast region now sends through this narrow channel,
   is almost beyond the power of enumeration, and the
   ceaseless tide of emigration, which is pouring its
   countless thousands upon the plains west of the Mis-
   sissippi, is adding steadily to its sum. However
   great may be the facilities for passenger traffic, be-
   tween the Atlantic and the Western States, the bulky
   products of their industry, which constitute tho basis
   of their prosperity, must seek tho markets of the
   world through the lines of internal'water communi-
   cation and their ocean extensions. Thus every
   waning year, increasing the industrial power of the
   mighty West, adds a now value to the strength that
   attends the geographical position of tho island of
   Cuba.
     The territorial relations of Cuba to the isthmus
   States, and to those bordering upon tho Gulf of
   Mexico, for purposes of defence -arc also of an im-
   portant character. Through its peculiar location it
   guards all the avenues of approach to their shores,
   making an attack upon them a movement of great
   difficulty and danger, while at the same time it cuts
18
                           humboldt’s cuba.
   •off all hope of a safe retreat in case of reverses to
   the attacking enemy. The importance of Cuba in
   this respect, in its relation to the United States, is
   shown in the circumstances attending the English
   expedition against Louisiana, during the last war
   with England. The army and fleet of Sir Edward
   Packenham were concentrated at Jamaica, and in
   their advance upon the United States, were com-
   pelled to sail for nearly seven hundred miles, almost
   within sight from the shores of Cuba. When forced
   by the battle of New Orleans to retreat, the British
   fleet, with the remains of the army on board, fled to
   Havana for succor and relief, and could not proceed
   to Jamaica until it had remained there some time
   to refit. Had Cuba at that time borne as intimate
   political as it does territorial relations, to the United
   States, the British fleet not only would have found
   no port of refuge there, but it could never have
   safely approached our shores. A similar instance
   occurred in the attack by the French upon Yera
   Cruz. The fleet of Prince de Joinvillc concentrated
   at Havana before the attack, and returned there to
   refit after it had captured San Juan de Ulua.
     The territorial relations of Cuba to the other
   islands of the Antilles, give it a marked prepon-
   derance. In area and population it exceeds all the
   other islands together, while in its abundance of safe
                                                     PRELIMINARY ESSAY
19
 and capacious ports it equals tliem. Its geographi-
cal position gives it also peculiar advantages in
respect to them. With one extremity resting in
undisturbed proximity upon the Continent for sup-
port, the other extends between, and in sight of St.
Domingo and Jamaica, which arc the only other
islands of the Antilles possessing any territorial im-
portance. Its natural resources and facility of inter-
nal communication, give to these territorial relations
a power which can never he superseded by any com-
bination of natural or acquired advantages in the
other islands of the American Archipelago.
   Its territorial relations to the United States, con-
stitute probably its greatest value in the estimation
of European Cabinets. The geographical formation
of our Atlantic and Gulf coasts places it midway
between them, enabling the power that holds Cuba,
to.impede at will all maritime intercourse between
their ports. At the same time it is the key to tho
sea gates of more than twenty thousand miles of
river navigation emptying into the Gulf of Mexico,
the shutting of which would inflict serious injury
upon every interest connected with the groat valley
of the Mississippi. The evil effects of such an
untoward event, would be felt not only by the indus-
trial pursuits of the great and increasing States in
that region, but also bv the manufacturing and com-
20
                                                                              ]
                                                                               i
                                                                               \i
                   HOMBOLD-r’s CUBA.                      ' .j
                     mercial interests of the North and East, to which j
                        • • ^
                     their important markets would be closed by the ^
 double operation of impeded intercourse, and the <
diminished ability of the West to consume the pro- .
ducts and fabrics of the East, consequent upon their 'j.
inability to dispose of their own surplus productions. *'
The territorial relations of the island of Cuba to i
the United States, have also a great importance in ■
another branch of their domestic economy. It con-
stitutes more than one-lialf of a bar of foreign ter-
ritory, laying directly over the most important lines j
of transit between the Atlantic and Pacific States of '.f
the Confederacy, across or through which must pass j
the greater portion of the trade and intercourse bo- .■
tween those sections, and of the armament and means J
for military defence of the Pacific States, if they ]
would avoid the uncertain delays and dangers inci- :j
dent to the route round Capo Horn. The traffic by j
the isthmus routes, between the ports of New York j
and San Francisco alone, is now of greater import- '
anco and value than our foreign trade with any one
nation, Great Britain not excepted. The value of j
treasure and merchandise transported by these routes j
exceeds annually one hundred millions of dollars, while
more than one hundred thousand passengers throng '
them, giving employment to nearly one-half the
ocean steam tonnage registered in the United States.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ii
                . PRELIMINARY ESSAY.            21
     This bar of foreign territory over-lying these im-
portant lines of transit, extends from Cape Catoche,
in Yucatan, which,is the eastern point of Mexico, to
the island of Porto Rico, a distance of fourteen hun-
dred miles; and, under tlie geographical necessities
of trade and travel, may be said, without any distor-
tion of language, 'to lie immediately between the
Atlantic and the Pacific. States. Through this bar
of foreign territory there are but three passages
open to commerce, all of which are in possession, or
under the immediate control of, European powers.
The most western of these is the narrow passage be-
tween Cape. Catoche and the western end of Cuba,
forming the southern outlet to the Gulf of Mexico,
and which can, bo approached from* the Atlantic
ports, only by first passing through the channel be-
tween the north coast of Cuba and the reefs of
Florida. This passage lies about one hundred and
fifty miles leeward from Havana.
   The passage next eastward is the channel between
the eastern en?l of Cuba and the western extremity
of St. Dbmingo. It is about forty miles wide at the
narrowest part* having the harbors of St. Jago and
Guantanamo, in Cuba, on one side, Gonave and Port
au Prince, in Ilayti, on the other, and Jamaica lying
directly across its southern outlet. These two are
those most frequented in our intercourse between the
22
                         Humboldt’s cuba.
   Atlantic and the Pacific States. The other passage
   is the narrow channel between the eastern end of St.
   Domingo and the island of Porto Rico, and is
   under the immediate control of the powers holding
   those two islands, being commanded by the bay of
   Samana, in St. Domingo, and the harbors in the
   Spanish island of Porto Rico.
     Of the territory comprised in this long extent of
   country, Cuba, being one-half, and Porto Rico, one-
   tenth, belong to Spain, the government of which can
   barely bo said to be an independent power; while
   St. Domingo, comprising about one-third, is held by
   the negro dynasty of Hayti and the mongrel govern-
   ment of Dominica, neither of which has a self-ruled
   policy. Jamaica, in possession of Great Britain,
   laps the contiguous extremities of the two greater
   islands. Cuba alone, of the Antilles, possesses suffi-
   cient territorial power to keep these passages open
   to our commerce, and to guarantee their safety.
   These territorial relations of that island, possessing as
   they do an important bearing upon all tfie neighboring
   countries, and conferring a moral power upon the gov-
   ernment that holds it, are tho subject.of solicitude to
   the governments of Western Europe, and seem wor-
   thy of the watchful care of the statesmen of America.
     II.    The political relations of Cuba, strictly speak-
   ing, are those of the crown of Spain, to which it is
                                                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
23
 subject; but the condition of the two countries is so
distinct, that it has given rise to natural political
necessities and relations, or affinities, on the part of
Cuba, which are separate from, and not unfrequently
opposed to those of the Spanish monarchy ; the one
being wholly a European power, while the other,
through her great productions and commerce, has
natural relations of a purely American character.
   The essential political interests of the island are
antagonistic to those of the mother country. While
the Cortes and the. crown have frequently declared
that Cuba does not form an integral part of the Span-
ish monarchy, but must be governed by special laws
not applicable to Spain, and persist in ruling her
under tlie erroneous and unjust European colonial
system, the growing wealth and increasing intelli-
gence of the Cubans, lead them to aspire to some
share in the elimination of the political principles
under which their own affairs shall be administered.
   A like antagonism exists in the economical rela-
tions of the two countries. While the people of
Cuba are not averse to the raising of such revenue
as may be required for the proper wants of the
State, in the administration of which they may par-
ticipate, they complain ‘with a feeling of national
pride, that ffscal burdens of the most onerous kind
are laid upon them for the expressed purpose of
24
humboldt’s cuba.
    advancing interests which are in every sense opposed
    to their own. Thus Spain imposes taxes to support
    a large army and navy, the principal object of which
    _ is to prevent any expression of the public will on the
    part of the people of Cuba. Another class of impo-
    sitions have for their object the diversion of the
    trade of Cuba to channels which shall increase the
    profits of the agriculturalists, and mariners of Spain,
    without regard to the interests of the people of the
    island. Whenever any of these burdens become so
    oppressive, or ruinous to the island, that the court
    cannot avoid taking cognizance 'of the complaints of
    .the people, the necessity that it must be replaced by
    some new tax, which shall immediately equal it in
    product to the revenue, is made the immutable con-
    dition of relief. In a word, the increase of the reve-
    nue, and the advance of the industrial interests of
    the people of Spain, are the guiding principles in
    the political economy of the present government of
    Cuba.
      The civil administration of Cuba is of the same"
    antagonistic character. We are relieved from
    extending our remarks on this point, by the full
    elucidation of the subject in the “Essay upon the
    political state, &c., of the Island of Cuba,” published
    by, General Jose ,de la Concha, in Spain, after liis
    return from the post of Captain-General of the
                                               PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
25
  island. The propositions sustained by General Con-
  cha are, that “ The prosperity of Cuba is not due to
  the so-called laws of the Indies; nor does it prove
  the social welfare of the island; nor the excellence
  of its government.” The result of this evil political
  system has been to create a feeling of dissatisfaction
  among the people of Cuba, and a direful determina-
  tion on the part of the government, which is thus
  expressed by General Canedo in his farewell address
  to the people of Cuba, on resigning the command of
  the island to General Pezuela, in December 1853.
    “ Remain then impassive in the love which you
  profess to our august queen, and to the mother coun-
  try ; remain obedient to the supreme government
  and to the authority which represents it, and never
  forget that the very existence and name of Cuba
  depends upon its continuing to be a Spanish pos-
  session.”
    The political relations of Cuba towards the other
continental nations of Europe, partake of the passive
antagonism inherent in the communities of America;
but as this is entirely absorbed by its submission to
Spain, these relations exhibit only the character of
those of the Spanish crown.
   With Great Britain a severe contest has been car-
ried on for several years, during which the mother
country, up to a certain period, defended the interests
                              2
 26               humboldt’s ouba.
 of her colony. The countervailing policy of France
in the Spanish peninsula, more than any other cir-
cumstance, enabled Spain to resist the demands of
England; but the advent of Louis Napoleon, and his
hearty union with the British cabinet in a policy,
which the Earl of Clarendon describes as affecting
the policy of those nations in both hemispheres,
changed the relative position of those governments
toward Spain. England claimed the right, under
treaty stipulations, to interfex*e in the domestic affairs
of Cuba, and as this claim and the attendant negotia-
tions involve some of the most important questions
relative to the future of Cuba, we give the following
extracts from the official correspondence on the sub-
ject. They will best exhibit the relative positions
and aims of the two governments, and perhaps throw
some light upon a matter which is still involved in
the obscurity of diplomatic intercourse. The possible
stipulations of Spain with England on this subject)
have awakened the liveliest alarm in Cuba, and have
been the subject of much warm discussion in this
country. .
   In 1841 England endeavored to establish by treaty
a British tribunal in Cuba, with power to decide the
status of the negroes making application to it. Lord
Aberdeen, in a dispatch of 31st December 1843, to
Mr. Bulwer, then British Minister in Spain, holds the
                                              PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
27
 following language in relation to this attempt, and its
temporary abandonment.
    “In 1841, the draft of a Convention was transmit-
ted to Madrid, by which it was proposed to institute,
by the aid of British functionaries, an examination
into the titles by which the slave population of Cuba
is held in servitude. Encouraged by the novel
appearance of good faith on the part of the govern-
ment of Cuba,- as it was then administered, her
Majesty’s government admitted the weight of certain
objections raised against that proposal by the gov-
ernment at Madrid, and forbore for the time to
press it.” 1
    Hie objections here alluded to, were the remon-
strances from Cuba, which were couched in the
strongest language. On the first allusion to the sub-
ject by the press in Spain, the Junta de Eomento
of Havana sent to the court a protest signed by Count
Villanueva (the intendant of the island), as president
of that body, which, after eloquently depicting the
results of that measure to Cuba, says:—
    “It is not to be presumed that any white man will
be disposed to submit to so hard a fate. They will
all prefer to emigrate to foreign countries to earn
  1 Report on the Slave Trade, laid before Parliament, 1853, pp.
69-70.
28
 Humboldt's cuba.
                                                                      A
 their livelihood and save the lives of their children, ;
if they do not previously adopt the course which a
state of desperation would prescribe.” * * *
   * * * “There has been but one feeling or opinion
since the arrival of the publications in question from . i
Madrid, which is, that the island would be irrecovera-
bly lost by it to the mother country, and to its inhab- i
itants, who would prefer any extreme to the calamity j
of sacrificing their fortunes, endangering their lives, |
and remaining in a state of subordination to the ■
negroes.”1                                            ‘
   This “ Draft of a Convention ” was sent to Cuba ,
by the Regency of Spain, for consultation, and i
produced the most urgent remonstrances from the ;j
municipal authorities of Havana, the Junta de Fo- ;
mento, and other public bodies, and from many I
eminent citizens to whom it was submitted by the j
local authorities. Their language was uniform and j
bold, the Ayuntamiento of Havana declaring that 1
if the Convention were signed by Spain, it would be q
productive of a bloody revolution in Cuba. These tj
representations induced England to forbear for a j
time.                                                 n
                    In 1850 and 1851, these demands were again
     1 Correspondence on the Slave Trade, published by order of the *
   House of Commons, 1841, Class B, p. 285.
                                           PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
29
  pressed by England with great energy arid warmth,
  and strenuously resisted by Spain. On the 23d
  March, 1851, Sehor Bertran de Lis writes to Lord
  Ilowden:
    “But it seems impossible that the well-known
  perspicuity of the Cabinet of London should have
  overlooked in its turn the immense responsibility
  imposed upon the queen’s government by the pre-
  sent circumstances of the Spanish Antilles, and the
  stringent duty in which it is placed, of proceeding
  with the greatest prudence and circumspection, in
  all matters which may exercise either directly or
  indirectly any influence upon the social and political
  situation of those colonies.
    “You are aware of the dangers by which these
  colonies are menaced. Yon know that for the pre-
  vention of these dangers, for the consolidation of the
  security and preservation of its transatlantic posses-
  sions, her majesty’s government, hitherto, unfortu-
  nately, reduced to its own means, cannot a9 yet rely
  upon the decided protection of its most important
  allies.”1
     The moment was opportune for England, and she
   did not hesitate to take advantage of it. General
   Lopez was at that time preparing in this country his
                1 Report on the Slave Trade, &c., 1853, p. 72.
30
 humboldt’s Cuba.
 Becond expedition to Cuba; and Spain feared the
possible loss of her colony. In the midst of these
anxieties Lord Palmerston writes to Lord Ilowden,
the British minister at Madrid:
  [Extract.]              Foreign Office, 10th July, 1851. ;
    “ The Spanish government will do well to consider
that if such a course of proceeding shall continue,
the people of this country, instead of looking with
displeasure at attempts which may be made to sever
Cuba from the Spanish monarchy, may be led to
view with satisfaction the accomplishment of an
event, which, in consequence of the conduct of the
Spanish colonial authorities, will have become the
only means of putting an end to the commission of
crimes which the Spanish crown solemnly bound it-
self, many years ago, utterly and for ever to prevent
any Spanish subject from committing.”1
                  LORD PALMERSTON TO LORD HOWDEN.
      [Extract.]           Foreign Office, 7th August, 1851,
      “Her majesty’s government deem it duo to the
    frankness which ought to characterize the intercourse
    of friendly governments, to let the Spanish govern-
    ment know, that if, as seems to be the case, the gov-
    ernment of Madrid is unable to cause its subordinate
                             1 Published dispatches.
                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
  31
 officers in Cuba to carry into execution the treaty
engagements of the Spanish crown for the suppression
of the slave-trade, and to enforce the laws promulga-
ted by the crown of Spain in execution of those
engagements, the British government must deem
itself obliged to take the matter into its own hands,
and to have recourse to such measures in relation to
it as may appear to her majesty’s government best
calculated to accomplish the purpose in view.” 1
   These threatenings were replied to by the Marquis
de Miraflores on the part of Spain, in a firm tone.
On the 19th of August, he wrote to Lord Howden:—
   “If by any unfortunate combination of circum-
stances, or perhaps in consequence of an inconsider-
ate zeal, or from any motive whatsoever, an undue
interference on the part of the commanders of the new
naval forces in matters of maritime or internal jurisdic-
tion of the island of Cuba, were to give rise to some
conflict with the authorities of that island; if in this or
any way, a new element of disturbance were added to
the numerous ones, which, in spite of the government
of the United States, are fostered against that island
by American pirates, in combination with some dis-
loyal natives of Cuba, her majesty’s government
declares at once, that after repulsing with all the
                        1 Published dispatches.
82
HU MIX) LOT'S CUBA.
      energy in its power any intrusion of that kind, it will
      hold the cabinet of London responsible for the fatal
      consequences which might therefrom ensue to Span-
      ish domination, under the critical circumstances
      under which it is now placed in the West Indies.
      And finally, that should the conflicts above alluded
      to take place, the Spanish goyemment would not
      hesitate to appeal to the decision of the whole of
      Europe, trusting that public opinion, even in the evei
      loyal and enlightened English nation itself, would
      justly appreciate whether the conduct of the British
      government would have been such as the government
      of the queen, my august sovereign, has a right to
      expect from a power which calls itself the friend and
      ally of Spain, and even consistent with what was
      required by the interests of England itself.”1
        On the 11th of September, Lord Palmerston replied
      to the Marquis of Miraflores, disclaiming all -wish to
      violate the rights of Spain, but at the same time
      desiring to come to a plain understanding with the
      government at Madrid, and to make that government
      comprehend that “Great Britain will no longer con-
      sent to be baffledand throwing upon the govern-
      ment of Spain any consequences that may arise.
      Duting this correspondence, the Marquis de Miraflo-
                                1 Published dispatches.
                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.               S3
res skillfully availed himself of an apparent contra-
diction in the arguments and recomendations of
England, to which Lord Palmerston replies:—
   “With reference to that passage in M. Miraflores’
note, in which he states that the Spanish government
cannot understand how her majesty’s government
can seriously recommend a measure which would
prove very injurious to the natives of Cuba, when
they also recommend that the Spanish government
should conciliate the affections of those Cubans, I 1
have to instruct your lordship to observe to M. de
Miraflores that the slaves of Cuba form a large por-
tion, and by no means an unimportant one, of the
population of Cuba; and that any steps taken to pro-
vide for their emancipation would, therefore, as far
as the black population are concerned, be quite in
unison with the recommendation made by her
majesty’s government; that measures should bo
adopted for contenting the people of Cuba, with a
view to secure the connexion between that island
and the Spanish crown; and it must be evident that
if the negro population of Cuba were rendered free,
that fact would create a most powerful element of
resistance to any scheme for annexing Cuba to the
United States, where slavery still exists.”1
                                                      1 Published dispatches.
                          2*
.          3   i
                       humboldt’s cuba.
         This correspondence, which was continued during
       the succeeding year, did not attain the desired result,
       and in December, 1852, Lord Palmerston,, in a dis-
       patch to Lord Howden, thus forcibly depicts the rea-
       sons which animate the Spanish government to resist
       the demands of England.
         “ First, in order to afford income to a number of
       ill-paid public officers, or to appointed favorites, by
       means of bribes given by slave-traders; and
         “ Secondly, for the purpose of retaining a hold
       upon the island; because it is thought at Madrid,
       that as long as there is in Cuba a large number of
       negroes, the white population will cling to the
       mother country for protection against the black
       race.
         “ But both these motives are founded in error, for
       it can never be the interest of a government to de-
       moralize its own officers, and to accustom them to
       violate the law; and a mother country will have but
       a feeble hold .of a colony, if the strongest tie which
       connects them, is the fear on the part of the planter
       of an insurrection of the negroes.
         “ It is obvious that protection against such danger
       might be found by other means, and in other quar-
       ters ; by the suppression of the slave trade, which
       many Cuban proprietors desire; or by annexation
                  PRELIMINARY ESSAY.                     35
   to some other State, for which scheme there a/re not
   wanting partisans in Cuba.”'
    These extracts show the antagonistic positions held
   by the governments of Spain and Great Britain to
   the close of the year 1852, and afford a clear insight
   into the aims of the latter, in regard to the
   political and social relations of Cuba. In the begin-
   ning of 1853, these positions were unchanged, and
   England continued to press her demands with una-
   bated vigor. This is evident from the following dis-
   patches :
                        LORD JOHN RUSSELL TO LORD ItOWDEN.
   [Extract.]            “Foreign Office, January 31, 1853.
     “Your lordship may he assured, that however
   friendly the councils of her majesty may be to
   Spain, whatever may be the interest of this country
   not to see Cuba in the hands of any other power
   than Spain, yet, in the eyes of the people of this
   country, the destruction of a trade which conveys
   the natives of Africa to become slaves in Cuba, will
   furnish a large compensation for such a transfer.
   For such an exhibition of public feeling the govern-
   ment of Spain should be prepared.”" 1
                      1 London Daily News, Slst December, 1852.
                      * Report on the Slave Trade, 1853—p. 195.
36
JIIJMBOI/Dt’8 CUBA.
                CONDE DE ALCOY TO LOUD BOWDEN.
       [Extract.]                  “ Madrid, February 9,1853.
         “ Her jnajesty’s government lias seen with deep
       regret the hint made by your lordship as to the effect
       which the supposed increase of the slave-trade is
       likely to produce on the opinion of England, with
       regard to the manner of viewing the fact of the
       island of Cuba being taken possession of by another
       poweu; and I assure your lordship that what on this
       subject is particularly painful to her majesty’s gov-
       ernment, and even more regretable than any consid-
       erations affecting the immediate interests of Spain,
       is the melancholy reflection that the change of opin-
       ion in England, which your lordship anticipates,
       would be a triumph for the partisans of force, and a
       defeat for the upholders of right; because from the
       moment in which it should be declared that, for more
       or lcs9 plausible reasons, although not connected
       with the questions of right, it is lawful to look with
       indifference at the spoliation of one nation by
       another nation, the subversion of all principles, and
       the oblivion of the law of nations,, on which the
       peace of the world is resting, would then be sanc-
       tioned. *        *     *
         “ At all events, the government, who knows the
       loyalty, and the noble feelings of the Spanish nation,
                                                         l’KELIMINAllY ESSAY.
37
 is well aware that, should the case arrive for it to
defend her right, this nation will do her duty as she
has done on former occasions, without counting the
elements of resistance, and relying only on God and
the sanctity of her cause, and on her constancy and
valor.”1
   Tliis position of Spain towards England, was soon
after changed for one of complete harmony with
regard to the social and political relations of Cuba,
and it is somewhat remarkable that the change in
the position of the Spanish government was so sud-
den, and unexpected by England, that conflicting
dispatches were written on the same day to each
other, by the secretary for foreign affairs in Lon-
don, and the British minister at Madrid. On the
16th of March, 1853, the Earl of Clarendon writes
to Lord Ilowden that the position of Spain “ endan-
gers the friendly relations between the two coun-
tries;”1 and on the same day Lord Ilowden writes
to the Earl of Clarendon, that “ the Spanish govern-
ment has agreed to a settlement of a question which
has long been a matter of painful discussion and dis-
pute.”8 What the conditions of this settlement were,
can only be partially conjectured from subsequent
              1 Report on the Slave Trade, p. 196.
    * Report on the Slave Trade, 1853—p. 196. * Do. p. 74.
38              iiumboldt’s  cuba.
events, and from the measures taken by Spain in
Cuba. Lord John Eussell stated in Parliament, on
the 4th of May following, that they were satisfactory
to England.
   Coincident with this arrangement between Eng-
land and Spain, there are two remarkable statements
made by British statesmen. On the occasion of the
rejection by the United States, of the proposition
made by England and France, to enter into a tripar-
tite treaty relative to Cuba, Lord John Eussell
directs the British minister at Washington to say to
the American secretary of state:
   “ Finally, while fully admitting the right of the
United States to reject the proposal made by Lord
Malmesbury, and Mons. de Turgot, Great Britain
must at once resume her entire liberty, and upon any
occasion that may call for it, be free to act either
singly or in conjunction with other powers, as to her
may seem fit.”
   Lord Clarendon, while secretary for foreign
affairs, subsequently made in Parliament this cele-
brated announcement relative to the united policy
of England and France.
   “ I will further add that the union between the
two governments has not been confined to the Eas-
                                                   PBELIMINARY ESSAY.
39
  tern question. The happy accord and good under-
 standing between Franco and England, have been
 extended beyond the Eastern policy to the policy
 affecting all parts of the world, and I am heartily
 rejoiced to say, that there is no portion of the two
 hemispheres with regard to which the policy of the
 i two countries, however heretofore antagonistic, is not
 now in entire harmony.”
    The foregoing extracts, with the subsequent mea-
 sures taken by Spain in Cuba, render it evident that
 the political relations of the island to England, which
 were for a long time the subject of warm discussion,
 have experienced a radical change.. The conduct of
 the British naval command ere in the mid-American
 waters last winter, sustain this view. As the effects
 of this change, and the consequent measures taken
 by the Spanish government in Cuba, relate more
 particularly to the social relations of that island, we
 shall consider them under that head.
     The political relations of Cuba to the republics of
   Spanish America, are of the most limited character.
   Havana was for a long time the centre of the opera-
   tions by Spain against her revolted colonies, and
   became the refuge of her troops, when they were
   driven from the continent. The few years that
   have elapsed since the recognition of the independ-
40
HUMBOLDTS CUBA.
 ence of those countries by Spain, have not sufficed
to create any important political relations, between
them, to which their opposing systems of government
are also averse. Within a few years the queen-
dowager of Spain, Maria Cristina, has maintained a
private agent at Havana, who has been connected
with intrigues in Mexico, and other places, with the
supposed object of placing a Spanish prince on an
American throne. These movements, however, have
been of little importance. The community of lan-
guage, customs, and religion between Cuba and the
republics of Spanish America, together with their
relative geographical positions, indicate a probable
political affinity whenever the axioms of public policy
which now rule in Cuba, shall have been changed.
  «The political relations of Cnba with the oilier
islands of the Antilles, have been very slight until
within a short time. For many years Spain did not
recognize the black empire of Hayti, and held little
intercourse with Dominica. Lately a treaty lias
been made with Soulouque and a diplomatic agent,
sent to Hayti, to act in conjunction with those of
England and France. Existing circumstances ex-
hibit a probable complication of these relations, at
no very distant day. The advancing age of Sonlou1
que", combined with the absence of a direct male
heir to his crown, and the intrigues for the ,8ucces-
                                               PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
41
 sion, may soon create a state of affairs in Hayti in
which the powers of western Europe, always so ready
to mingle in questions of territorial difficulty, or
of dynasty, may feel themselves called upon to inter-
fere. Any infringement of the rights of a subject
of either crown may form a pretext, and a cover for
political designs, as we have seen in late occurrences
in the Dominican republic, where a pretended in-
fraction of individual rights, enabled them to pre-
vent the completion of a treaty between that republic
and the United States.
   Tlie political relations of Cuba with the United
States constitute, in a great measure, those of Spain
with this country. They have been marked with
many cases of irritated feeling, arising in most part
from the wrong application of general principles to
private cases, by ignorant and irresponsible officials.
All the exponents of Spanish public policy trace the
loss of her rich American possessions to the evil
example of the United States; and from this they
deduce a necessity of resistance to every principle
or precept, that in any way assimilates to the Ameri-
can theories; and this necessity, they think, can he
fully complied with, only by a constant opposition
to the interests of such American citizens as com-
merce, or any other cause, may bring within the
sphere of their power. The Spanish press in Cuba
42
 humboldt’s cuba.
 also-strives to impress upon the public mind the be-
lief that a war of races exists, and that wherever the
American Saxon has prevailed, the Spaniards and
and their descendants have been despoiled and driven
out.
    Influenced in a great measure by these ideas, we
have seen repeated instances of abuse of power by
the subordinate officials in the island, exercised upon
American citizens and consuls; and on some occa-
sions by the superior ones, when such abuse was
supposed to produce an advantageous political effect
in Cuba. This disposition on the part of the Spanish
officers towards the United States and their citizens,
has been fostered by the marked difference exhibited
between the policy of the European powers and that
of our own government, in regard to the rights of
their subjects and citizens abroad. Whenever a
subject of any of the prominent powers of Europe
complains to the respresentative of his government
of an infringement of his rights, his relation of the
facts of the case is assumed by the representative to
be the correct one, and immediate action is taken;
and not unfrequently followed by an exhibition of
force to compel respect, or restitution. In all such
cases the representative receives the public sanction
and eupport of his own government, even if he has
acted inconsiderately; reproof for over-zeal being a
                                               PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
43
 subject of private administration. Unfortunately
for our own citizens abroad, our government, con-
scious of its own respect for tlie rights of the foreigner
here, assumes that every other government is ani-
mated by the same feeling, and has pursued a system
of international intercourse the reverse of that fol-
lowed by European governments;—inquiry being
substituted for belief, and delay for action. Thus
the wrong is often consummated, and submitted to
by the citizen, because the 'seeking of redress is
more ruinous to him than submission, and the affair
is forgotten,—-no administration being anxious to
assume and correct the omissions of former ones. If
any representative abroad embroils himself with the
subordinates of a foreign power, in seeking redress
for our citizens, his- communications to the cabinet
at Washington remain unanswered, and he is not
unfrequently abandoned to the degrading sense of
having urged an unsustained demand. For the sup-
port of these assertions, we do not hesitate to appeal
to every one of our citizens, who lias been in public
position abroad as a representative of tho United
States.
   These circumstances have tended to complicate
our political relations with Cuba, for the nature of
the Spanish character has been so orientalized, by
the seven hundred years of Moorish dominion in
44
 Humboldt’s cuba.
 Spain, that a Spaniard generally respects only those ■
whose power lie fears; and being released from all
fear of that of the United States, the conduct of the ■
subordinate Spanish officials towards our citizens and
representatives, is uniformly one of disrespect, cov-
ered with a tin’ll mask of great politeness. Thus has
arisen the long list of insults to consuls, and outrages
upon private citizens, presented by the history of our
relations with Cuba; and which, through each suc-
ceeding neglect, has so increased, that no adminis-
tration has yet been found with sufficient nerve to
open the whole subject.
   III.    Tho industrial relations of Cuba are exhibited ,1
in detail in the pages of the following work, and a i
few general remarks are all that are required here, j
The nature of her soil, climate, aDd labor, peculiarly ,
adapt her to the production of sugar, coffee, and
tobacco, and to the cultivation of these three staples
her industry has been mainly directed. . Under these
circumstances, an untrammelled commerce with
other countries is as necessary,to her social existence,
as it is for the advance of her public wealth., The
meats and grains for the subsistence, as well as the ■
fabrics for the use of the inhabitants, must be ob-
tained from other countries through the medium of \
commercial exchanges. In conducting these, the <
care and intelligence of individuals directly inter-
                                                   PEELIMIKAliY ESSAY.
45
 ested in the result of each private enterprise, are
better able to attain an advantageous result to each
adventure, than the wisest legislation can possibly,
be ; and it is the aggregate of individual profits that
constitutes the public gain, and the welfare of the
State. The commerce of Cuba, therefore, would be
. most advantageously conducted, if left to the natural
promptings of individual profit and loss. A diifer-
ent economical theory, however, prevails with the
government of Cuba, and restrictive laws modify
her industrial action in a manner that produces a
largo positive loss to her.
   Her natural exchanges with Spain are the products
of her own labor, in return for the fruits of Andalu-
sia, and the wines of Catalonia. The existing laws,
however, compel her to purchase in Spain all the
flour consumed in Cuba, at a cost fifty per cent,
greater than she could obtain it in nearer markets,
if free to seek them; while the same obstacles force
her to import in Spanish ships, a large portion of the
products brought from other countries, at a mnch
greater cost for freight than if her merchants could
employ those who would perform the service at the
lowest rate. Thus, for a valuable portion of her
trade, she is forced to employ two sets of ships; one
to bring the linens and cottons from the looms of
46
humboldt’s cuba.
  ' f
   Europe to her ports, and another, which comes empty . -‘j
   to her shores, to convey the return cargoes of sugar
   and other productions. "Without the existing system I •
   of differential duties in favor of Spanish bottoms, 4
   the vessels which now come to Cuba in ballast from    , •)
   Europe, would supply all the wants of the trade,      J
   and the costly employment of a large number of        1
   Spanish vessels could be dispensed with.              I
      The industrial relations of Cuba with the northern i
   nations of Europe, are principally confined to the |
   exchange of her products for their linen and cotton j
   fabrics, glass, and iron ware.                        '■]
   ' England loans her the capital to build her railways,
  ■ and the improvements made in the arts and sciences   '!
- in France, are eagerly studied, and readily adopted    1
   by the people of Cuba, particularly in everything
   relating to their own immediate pursuits.
      The industrial relations of Cuba with the United
   States have been of a more important character, and '
   have had more influence in her material progress, ■
   than those with any other country. In the dawning
   years of her prosperity, she found here the food and /
                                                          t '
   lumber for the supply of her agricultural industry ;
   the articles of use or luxury desired for the comfort ■:
   of her people ; and, in no small degree, the skill and 't;
   capital for the development of cominerco, and the ■
                                                                   I’JRELLMIN AliY ESSAY.
47
 mechanic arts in her ports. During many years her
trade with this country exceeded that with all other
nations.
  There are, probably, no two separate countries
whose industrial relations are so completely recipro-
cal, as those of Cuba and the United States. Pro-
ducing staples that enter into constant general use in
tliis country, the natural wants of her people afford
a market for the products of every section of the
Union. The forests, fisheries, manufactures, and
shipping of New England; the farmers, dairymen,
miners, and handworkers of the middle States; the
lumber-men, naval stores, and rice-growers of the
South; and the meats and grains of the West, all
find an appropriate exchange in the markets of Cuba.
An adverse fiscal system, aided by our own unwise
retaliatory acts of 1832-3, have changed the course
of a large portion of this trade, and retarded its gen-
eral increase.
    The cotton and linen manufactures of Europe are
  consumed in Cuba to the value of five millions of
  dollars annually, a large portion of which might be '
  supplied by the better and cheaper products of
  American looms. In the same manner we find that
  unequal fiscal impositions change the natural current
  of other branches of trade, and that flour, instead of
  being purchased in the cheapest mart in the world,
48
htjmboldt’s cuba.
        is sought on the other side of the Atlantic; that olive
        oil of the most inferior quality is enabled to compete ‘
        largely with lard for domestic purposes; and that of >
        forty millions pounds of meats imported, less than ;
        three millions, or about seven per cent, only, is
        imported from the United States: while butter and ,
        pork, being subject to an equality of fiscal exactions,
        are imported to the extent of more than ninety per
        cent, from this country.
          The proximity of Cuba to the United States, and
        the constant and frequent intercourse between them,
        have been productive of the happiest effect upon the •
        industry of the island. Her infant coastwise com-
        merce found, in our small vessels, a ready supply for
        its needs; and her steam navigation received its first I
        impulse and subsequent growth from our own. The 1
        erection of machinery, and the application of steam J
        power to labor in all parts of Cuba, have also been,. '
        in no small degree, the result of this proximity; and
        the influence of these, and many concurrent relations,"i
        has been felt in every throb of her industrial system.
          The industrial relations of Cuba with Spanish
        America have been injuriously aftected by political •;
        causes which have nearly destroyed a once profitable ■
        trade with the ports on the Gulf of’Mexico, and the
        Caribbean sea. The most important branch of com-
        merce with them is the trade in jerked beef brought
                                                    PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
49
 from Buenos Ayres. It is not a reciprocal trade, for
the countries of La Plata consume a very small
amount of Cuban products; but is the fruit of the
present fiscal system of the island, the greater duties
upon the meats of North America forcing the con-
sumer to seek a supply from the inferior products of
the plains of South America.
   The true relation of Cuba, or rather of its chief
port, Havana, to Spanish America, is indicated by
Baron Humboldt, in comparing it to the relation of
New York to the United States. This natural con-
nection has been severed by the wars of independence
in Mexico, and South America, and almost annihila-
ted by the long continued obstinacy of Spain, in
refusing to acknowledge the independence of her
former colonies. Speaking of the early years of the
present century, Baron Humboldt says, “ Havana pur-
chases in foreign marts much larger quantities of
goods than are needed for her own consumption,
exchanging her colonial products for the fabrics of
Europe, and selling them again at Vera Cruz, Trux-
illo, Laguaira, and Cartkagena.” The proximity and
frequent communication of Havana with the United
States and Europe, should have made her the medium
not only for the interchanges of commerce with
Spanish America, but also for those of politics, science,
art, and literature,
                  3
50
humboldt’s cuba.
         When the former Spanish colonies 'were severed
       from Havana, they were in a great measure deprived ■
       of a necessary connection with the advancing civiliza* >
       tion of Europe and America, the rays of which,
       gathered as it were in a focus by the world-wide com-
       merce of that city, would have become assimilated, .
       and adapted there, to the spirit and needs of her sis-
       ter communities, reflecting thence upon them, to their
       constantly increasing advantage and enlightenment.
       The elements of that natural relation with Spanish
       America, still exist in the admirable geographical
       position of Havana, in the community of language
       and religious faith, and in the reciprocal necessities
       of the people. Here we may And the key to the true
       theory of the regeneration of Spanish America; for
       we cannot suppose that the extension of American :
       institutions, and of our theories of freedom, and self- ■
       government over those countries, involve the annihi- ;
       lation of the Spanish race in America.
         IV.    The social condition and relations of Cuba .
       have been influenced and modified by her insular
       position, and by her political connection with Spain. jj
       To the first of these is, probably, to bo traced the
       cause that her population is composed in a great 1
       measure of two unmixed races—the European white
       and the African black; and to the second, the reason .
       that, notwithstanding a community of origin and
                                            PKELIMINABY ESSAY.
51
language, there is little social affinity between her
population and the Spanish American nations of the
continent. In contemplating the present social con-
dition of Cuba, we should not forget the origin and
causes of the principles and laws upon which it is
based.
  The early settlers of Cuba and of South America
were fearless adventurers seeking for. gold. The
native races of the Antilles soon melted away under
the hardships imposed upou them by their new task-
masters, and these, cavaliers and hardy men-at-arms,
were unfitted to till the soil, or pursue the peaceful
avocations so necessary to the welfare of every com-
munity. The disappearance of the indigenous races
gave rise to a great social necessity in the new set-
tlements. “Send us at once,” say the Spanish
officers in Cuba, in 1534, to the emperor, “ send us
at once the seven thousand negroes* that they may
become inured to labor, before the Indians cease to
exist; otherwise the inhabitants cannot sustain them-
selves, nor the government detain any one hero, for
with the new tidings from Peru, all desire to leave.”'
  This social necessity gave birth to nogro slavery
in America; but the new institution made little pro-
gress until the humanitarian arguments, which we
find again brought forward now for its destruction,
were brought to its aid. Las Casas, bishop of
52
humboldt’s cuba.
        Chiapas, moved by the deepest compassion for the
        native races, urged, upon the ground of humanity,
        the substitution of African slaves for the natives in
        the labor of the new communities. The hardships
        of the poor Indian were dwelt upon with the same
        fervor and zeal, the same heedless inconsistency,
        that characterizes the appeals of the humanitarians
        of the present day in behalf of the negro, and the
        conscience of Europe gave an energetic impulse to
        the new institution. Thus did a fallacious sentiment
        of humanity give life to the new social system in
        America, and work a change in the material con-
        dition of man throughout the world, widely different
        from that anticipated for it by its early apostles.
          The cultivation, in the New World, of the so-called
        colonial staples, has produced effects far surpassing
        those of all the gold discoveries in the world, from
        those of Cibao to those of California and Australia.
        Not only have the looms and the world-wide com-
        merce of Europe, drawn their richest springs of life
        from the cultivation of cotton and sugar by the
        slaves of America, but a revolution has been effected
        by it, in the clothing and food of man everywhere,
        that has wrought the happiest effects upon his social,
        moral, and hygienic condition. The humbler classes
        of the present age would deem it a hardship to 1>C
        confined to the bacon and beer breakfasts of the
                                              PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
53
 sumptuous Queen Elizabeth, and millions now re-
joice in the once highly-esteemed luxury of stockings.
   It has become orthodox with modern humani-
tarians to question the humanity of the theory of
Las Casas. If we could have an impartial view of
the condition of the great mass of negroes in Africa,
of their social and military slavery from the earliest
ages, subject to the sway of barbarous native chiefs,
it might be found that his argument in favor of the
change from a savage to a civilized master, was not so
inconclusive as is now supposed; and that the step
itself was not so cruel as it lias been, and still is
painted. But if we doubt the humanity of the social
theories of Las Casas, and the humanitarians of the
sixteenth century, what verdict may not posterity
accord to those of Wilberforce and the humanita-
rians of the nineteenth century, when it contemplates
the results of their social experiments in St. Domingo,
Jamaica, and the other islands of the American
Archipelago.
   The two unmixed races exist in Cuba, under a
social organization in which the inferior is subject to
the superior race, to the manifest material and moral
advantage of both. The material condition of the
inferior or slave race, is not that degraded and suffer-
ing state of deprivation, which the reasoners upon
the abstract question of slavery assume it to be. On
54r
HUMBOLDT’S CUBA.
     the contrary, the relation of master and slave is one
     of mutual dependence, and creates ties between
     them which do not exist in countries where the two
     races live in a state of civil equality. The feeling9
     of affection incident to an intimate and continued
     intercourse from the cradle to the grave, are not
     interfered with or broken by the existence of sepa-
     rate interests. Though the slave is hound to reside
     with and labor for his master, -this does not infer that
     his whole time and strength is consumed in bringing
     profit to his owner. It is true the general direction
     of his labors lies with his master, yet the slave in
     America is able to devote a much larger portion of
     his time and strength, to his own individual comfort
     and pleasure, than is the manufacturing or agricul-
     tural laborer, who is not a freeholder, in those com-
     munities where slavery does not exist. Not only are
     his present wants supplied, in return for his labor,
     but he has no future of age and poverty to provide
     for, or to fear. His material condition is thus one
     of comparative happines, (and all happiness is com-
     parative), and this is further improved by tho insti*
     gations of interest with his master, and by that
     friendly sentiment toward all who are dependent
     upon us, or' upon whom we have conferred a favor,
     which is innate to the human heart. The possession
     of power, or control by the slaveholder, over the
                .PRELIMINARY ESSAY.                55
                        labor of bis slaves, does not make him a tyrant, but
                        rather does it give him a feeling of stronger affinity
                        0 f
 .with them, apart from that of interest, and creates in
his breast those friendly ties which every human
bosom experiences for its dependents.
   The moral condition of the slave is also benefited
by his relation with his master. Every individual
is brought into an intimate connection with a better
society, and example, than is afforded him by his
own class exclusively, and the faculty of imitation,
which is much stronger in the negro than that of
origination, stimulates him to imitate his superior,
rather than his equal. At tlio same time the exer-
cise of the control of a superior intelligence over his
social intercourse, and moral deportment, are pro-
ductive of a state of morals which will compare
most favorably with that of the lower classes under
a different social organization. A respect for the
laws, and for the rights of others is thereby incul-
cated, and the religious sentiment is developed to a
degree never found in the free negro, and seldom in
the same relative class in other communities. Pau-
perism never exists among slaves, and great crimes
are much more rare among them than among the
lower classes in free States.
             It is under this social organization, that Cuba has
     risen to that condition of material prosperity which
                             $ ,
56
humboldt’s cuba.
        she exhibits to the world, and that is so clearly set ■■
        forth in the following work of Baron Humboldt*
        This material prosperity indicates a state of social
        welfare, as does public decay argue a state of private .
        or individual suffering. Before we proceed to exam-
        ine the new measures which Spain proposes to intro-
        duce into the legislation of Cuba, let us contemplate
        the condition of those communities, where, under
        similar circumstances of climate and population, the
        new social theories have been carried into practice.
           Of the social condition of the negro community of
        Hayti we have few means of judging, and these are
        offered only by transient visitors. Its government
        does not attempt to attain any social statistics, and 1
        the evidences presented by the material aspects of
        the country, lead to the most lamentable conjectures .
        as to the actual condition of the inhabitants. It is
        generally admitted that they have relapsed far
        f toward a state of barbarism, and that the dark ‘
        practices of fetish worship, and heathenism, are
        rapidly extinguishing there the light of the genial
        precepts of Christianity.
           Jamaica affords us better means for contemplating
        the results attending the experiment of the civil,
        equality of the black with the white race, where the' -
        numbers of the former preponderate, and those, too, ,
        of a character that does not admit of doubt. From
                                                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
57
 “A report of tlie Central Board of Health of
Jamaica,” in 1852, printed by order of the Assem-
bly of that island, we make the following extracts:
   “Generally speaking, the towns’and villages are
straggling, and cover a large space of ground in
proportion to the number of houses. The streets are
often crooked and irregular, * * * for the most part
narrow, unpaved, flat or even concave, and without
any provision for foot passengers; too frequently they
become the receptacle for all sorts of filth and dirt.”
—Page 93.
   “Yards * * * which after a rain send forth
streams of the most horrible description; numbers
of dilapidated and falling houses, useless for all
habitable purposes, ruined walls and remnants of
fences, together with unenclosed sites of pulled-down
houses, covered with filth and bush, complete the
scene of every old Jamaica township, and the outskirts
of the new—Page 99.
     “In villages, and on small settlements, the huts or
  dwellings of the laborers are composed chiefly of
  mud walls, sometimes of wattles plastered with the
  same. * * * In very few cases are they raised otf
  the ground, nor arc they floored in any way. * * *
  Ventilation, or the admis|jon of fresh air, is almost
  invariably neglected.”—Page 100.
                                  3*
58
iiumboldt’s Cuba.
           “These small, dark, unventilated houses are fre-
         quently over-crowded, especially at night; within
         the small space of a few square feet, perhaps on the
         bare ground, or may be on a mattress or mat, or in
         some cases on a bed, with a whole family of eight or .
         nine persons of all ages, and of both sexes, huddled
         together, with the door and so-called window closed;
         all clad in the same clothes which they wore through -
         the day, with children sleeping on mattresses often ’’
         soaked and half rotted with urine and other secrc- ■
         tions; should there accidentally he a hole or crevice,|
         this is immediately closed up by means of rags or.j
         something of the kind. The rush of odors
         opening such a place must be experienced to
         understood.”—Page 102.
           “As regards water for domestic purposes, it is
         very much to be feared that a large portion of our,.-
         poor population seldom think of that. Their persons .j
         are never ablutcd save in crossing a river, or being,]
         exposed to a heavy shower of rain.”—Page 103.   - i
           “Among the lower classes, great errors occur in^
         relation to food, both as to quantity, quality, and the|
         period of taking their meals. * * * At night, bow- i
         ever, they take what they term their pot; this con- .]
         sists of a sort of soup, composed of salt beef or pork,
         (if rancid or high, it is prejjprred), with vegetables of
         all lands, highly seasoned, or of salt fish or corned ]
on • ■
be I
                                                   PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
59
   fish, with plantains, yams, cocos, &c.; of this they
   partake most freely, literally fulfilling the meaning
   of the expression, ‘‘bellyful.’ The meal over, they
   fall asleep, and as might he expected, are most diffi-
   cult to arouse.”—Page 106.
    “In former times, the lower orders of the laboring
   population were considered to be very abstemious.
   There appears, however, to be a tendency to excess
   among many of them, especially those located in
   towns; their favorite drinks are those compounds
   known as Anisettes, and liquors of a similar kind.”
   •—Page 108.
      “Among the lower classes the majority not com-
    pelled by circumstances to be field-laborers, are too
    lazy to move; they frequently squat down all day in
    a sort of sullen apathy; they cat, and drink, and sleep
    like the brute that perisheth, but all the more active
    impulses of their human nature appear to be as little
    excited as if they were totally wanting.”—Page ilO.
       “ It is a well known fact that all the towns and
    villages contain a large number of persons who
    have no ostensible means of earning their livelihood;
    the way in which they subsist is an enigma to them-
    selves and others. Exposure to the night-air is
    very prevalent among the lower classes; under
    various excuses they meet in numbers, frequently in
    the open air, or undeh temporary sheds, as at the
60
nuMBOLDT’s CUBA.
         performance of wakes over the dead, and also at
         their revels of john-canoeing, as it is termed, about
         Christmas time; on these or other occasions of the
         kind, they give full scope to animal enjoyment; and
         at the pitch of the excitement of the prevailing pas-
         sions their gestures and acts resemble more those of
         demons than of human beings.”—Page 111.
            “ Among the lower classes of the population there
         is great reason to fear that little or no advance has
         been made in the better maxims of social life. If a
         moral feeling exists among them, it is (not?) shown
         by the calendars of our criminal courts, where the
         women complain of rape, or attempt to commit
         rape, and unhappily they occur incessantly.”—Page
         112.
             “Superstitious habits have always been, and will
         always be, common in a community like this, com-
         posed of individuals of so many different races and
         countries, many of whom openly profess heathenism.
         The dark practices of Obeah and Myalism have at
         times effected a vast amount of mischief in this
         island.”—Page 113.1
            “ All the efforts of their pastors to eradicate, by moral and, re-
         ligious instructions, the belief in, and the dread of, this remnant of
         African barbarism, have failed. The female natives of Haiti, are
         adepts in the art.”—Replies of Dr Chamberlaine. Appendix to
         Report of Central Board of Health of Jamaica, &c.—Page 158.
                                             PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
61
   “ Examine the present sanitary condition of the
Island. * * * Observe well the fact that the
existing laws, meagre as they are, as relates to
sanitary matters, arc daily broken, and put to open
defiance in our very towns and thoroughfares.
* * * Correct all this, and then will immigration
prove to us a benefit; then will it be a boon to
the liberty-crippled American black, a source of
temporal and eternal advantage to the African hea-
then. Till this is done, any further attempt to induce
strangers to embark their fortunes here, can be but
to disregard the laws of God and man, and by ex-
posing the deceived to destruction; to bring down
greater judgments yet upon the authors of their ruin.”
—Page 117.
   The testimony of Capt. C. B. Hamilton of the
royal navy, in 1853, before a committee of the House
of Commons, in relation to the condition* of that
island, is curt and to the point. We present the
following extract:
   “ Chairman.—You made use of a phrase some
time ago with respect to Jamaica having become a
desert. Will you explain to what extent you apply
that term ?
   “ Capt. Hamilton.—I mean that in going to plan-
tation establishments that had evidently been once
62
 humboldt’s ouba.
 splendid buildings, where there had been a great out-:
lay of capital on a grand scale, you find the roofs
tumbling in, the places deserted, nobody in them,
grass growing in the rooms, and perhaps rats and
snakes in those very rooms, and a deserted, melan-
choly appearance that certainly goes to one’s heart
to view.
    “ Chairman.—Is that applicable only to -one part,
or is it the general character ?
    “     Capt. Hamilton.—It is the general character.
    “ Mr. Bright.—That is not the case in Jamaica,
  but in those particular locations 1
    “ Capt. Hamilton.—No; the general character of
  Jamaica is, that it gives you the impression of a
  place going to decay. Speaking of the population
  of Jamaica, I do not refer to the capitalist planters
  of old times, but of the present population of Jamaica,
  and their locations and cultivations.
     “ Mr. Bright.—Do you think the term ‘desert’
  was quite applicable to the state of things there ? '
     “ Capt. Hamilton.—I should say peculiarly ap-
  plicable, without any exaggeration.”1
                                                              r
     To this sad picture we will add but one other ex-
  tract, the crowning testimony of the present desolate *
     * Report on the Slave Trade, printed by order of the House of
   Commons, 1853—page 13.
                                                   PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
63
 condition, and social degradation of the population
of Jamaica. It is from a speech delivered by the
Rev. Dr. King, of Glasgow, Scotland, at a large
meeting in Kingston, Jamaica, the very scene of his
eloquent and vivid description, where every one of
his hearers could have contradicted his statements,
had they not been in accordance with the facts.
They were not contradicted, but were-reported by
David Turnbull Esq., one of the British champions
of the movement for negro emancipation, and
printed in London.
    “ Allusion has been made to the distressed condi-
   tion of Jamaica, and I am sure that its distress has
   not been exaggerated. You inhabit a beautiful
   island. Its climate is so good, that when its advan-
   tages for health shall be better known, I think your
   colony must come to replace Madeira in British esti-
   mation, as a desirable retreat for consumptively dis-
   posed patients. Your soil is confessed to be gener-
   ally excellent. The weeds of your public roads are
   the ornamental plants of our green-houses and hot-
   houses. Your very wilds are orchards. The grand-
   eur of your mountains is qualified only by the soft
   charms of their vegetation, and the bounty of nature
   has transformed your rocky cliffs into hanging-gar-
   dens.
64
humboldt’s cuba.
        “ Your isle lias .a central position in the ocean,as if
      to receive and to dispense the riches of the earth.
      You speak one language, and the composition of this
      meeting shows that a happy harmony subsists among
      the sections of your community. Such facts as these
      would lead us to expect prosperity. But instead of
      prosperity we witness prostration.
        “You have peace, fertility, health—all the usual
      guarantees of national well-being—and yet your
      loading families are disappearing; your stately man-
      sions are falling into decay; your lovely estates are
      thrown up; men’s hearts are everywhere failing
      them for fear, as if war, or famine, or pestilence
      desolated your borders. The existence of such dis-
      tress is matter of notoriety, but I think it has not
      been sufficiently pressed upon public attention,
      and especially on British attention, that religion
      and education are largely sharing the general
      calamity.
        “ But it is too certain that these highest of all
      interests are suffering. On the north side of the
      island, and on the south side of the island, numer-
      ously attended meetings of missionaries, belonging
      to different denominations, have been recently held,
      to deliberate on matters of common interest to them,
      and all the brethren assembling on these occasions
      were agreed in the conviction that the secular and
                                                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
65
 spiritual instruction of the island are, for the most
part, in a low and declining condition.
   “ They were not less united in assigning the tem-
poral distress of the colony as a principal cause of
tlieir peculiar difficulties, and discouragements.'
While churches and societies at home are diminish-
ing the amount of their assistance to missionary in-
stitutions here, the inhabitants are disabled, by their
sad reverses, from supporting their own ministers
and teachers, as they otherwise might; and persons
who have still some means at their disposal, are
tempted to plead the badness of the times, as a suffi-
cient apology for restricting tlieir exei’tions.
   “ The consequence is, that ministers are returning
home ; schoolmasters are returning home ; and the
places of those competent and devoted benefactors
are left vacant, or filled by others less qualified to
succeed them. To what is this lovely island retro-
grading? Ye friends of humanity, who have done
so much, awake and bestir yourselves, lest all that
you have done be undone—lest your work be ruined,
and your reward lost! From the scene of the facts,
amid a great assembly perfectly qualified to judge
the accuracy of my statements, I tell you that the
objects on which you have expended so much money,
so much labor, so much time, so much life, are in
jeopardy; and ignorance, irreligion, superstition,
66
 jiumboldt’s Cuba.
 intoxication, profligacy, are hovering, like birds of
prey, over your schools and chapels, threatening'
them with destruction.”
   Such was the contrast presented to the people of
Cuba, between the social condition of the inhabitants'
of Jamaica and their own, when the new captain-
general, the Marquis de Pezuela, arrived at Havana,.
prepared to carry out the measures which had been
pronounced satisfactory by the government of Great
Britain. Heedless of the disasters which the enforce-;
ment of its vicious and mistaken theories had pro-
duced in its own colonies, that government had pros-;
ecuted its aims with undiminished energy, as we
have shown in our remarks on the political relations
of Cuba, and Spain had given a reluctant consent to i
introduce into the legislation of her colony, measures'
which had been abhorrent to her, and which endan-i
gered not only the connection of Cuba with the1
crown, but also its social and political existence. A‘;
slight effort was made to cover tho true tendencies:
of the new measures, by the manner of their intro-
duction ; in the words of Lord Ashton to Senor Fer-
     1 “The Jamaica movement for enforcing the slave-trade treaties,
   &c. Prepared at the request of the Kingston Committee. Printed
   for gratuitous distribution. Charles Gilpin, London, 1852.”—Page
   70, et 8eqf
                                             PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
G7
 rer, the Spanish minister, “ it is by units ’ and not
by ‘ cargoes,’ that the process of liberation will take
place, so that the proceedings will be much less
alarming in their general aspect, or in their individ-
ual amount.”
   Previous to the arrival of General Peznela at Ha-
vana, the discussion of the slavery question had been
sedulously prevented there, by the government cen-
sorship of the pr.ess. He entered upon the govern-
ment of the island on the 3d of December, 1853, and
on the 7th and 8th of the same month the “ Diario
de la Marina,” his special organ, contained elaborate
articles, in which tho former policy of the govern-
ment was condemned, and the necessity of “ pro-
gress was urged, and a change insisted upon,”
although the writer admitted that, “great social
phenomena are not suppressed without creating
greater embarrassments, or at least equal difficulties
with those we aspire to eradicate.” The position
and new obligations of Spain are thus alluded to in
the articles in question:
    “ A member of the vast community of European
nations, and bound to it by a thousand ties of glory
and*of interest, she could not remain unmoved by
the general torrent of thought and idea. With these
she has contracted obligations which her honor
68
 HUMBOLDT’S CUBA.
  and lier true interest demand she shall comply
with.”
   As these articles were known to emanate directly
from the palace, if not from the pen of General
Pezuela himself, their publication caused the great-
est excitement among the black, and alarm among
the white inhabitants. In a few days they were
followed by others, in which the intentions of the
government wore more openly avowed, and the
superiority of free labor to slave labor was asserted
and defended. The States of Kentucky and Ohio
were cited, where, it was stated, “ a single glance at
the aspect of the streets of Louisville and Cincinnati,
reveals the different, and even opposing genius and
tendencies of their economical organization,'”1 and
the duty of softening the “ necessary transition ” was
admitted.
     In the midst of this general excitement a novel
   decree relating to the “ emancipado ” negroes was
   issued,1 which was soon followed by a new code of
   laws, establishing a system of free labor," and this
   was succeeded by another decree relative to the
     J Diario de la Marina, 18th December, 1853,        t
     ,J General Pczuela’s official letter to Count Cauongo, 20th Decern'
   ber 1853.
     8 Ordenanza, 23d December, 1853,
                                                 PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
69
 “ emancipados.”1 The unnecessary ostentation, and ,
exciting language of all of these official documents,
greatly increased the alarm of the white inhabitants.
Coincident with these measures, the press announced
that what the government “ had in view is to make
a transition from labor that is entirely compulsory,
to the organization of labor under a state of com-
plete freedom;”9 and the fact is officially acknowl-
edged in General Pezuela’s Circular9 to the local
governors and lieutenant-governors of the island. A
secret consulting circular, which soon became public,
was also issued by the government, announcing its
intention to permit the introduction of a large num-
ber of free negro apprentices from Africa.*
    The excitement among the black population of
   Cuba, but more particularly in the capital, caused by
   these publications, and the accompanying measures
   of the government, was intense. Numbers of
   negroes promenaded the streets of the city, taking
   the wall from the whites, for the avowed purpose of
   exhibiting their sense of their expected new civil
   rights; while others, more bold, sought the prome-
   nades and places of public resort, where they asser- 1 * * 4
      1 Ordenanza, 1st January, 1854=.
      * Diariode la Marina, 26th December, 1853,
              s Gobicrno y Capitania General Circular, 23d December, 1853.
       4 Marquis de Pezuela, Circular, 18th January, 1854.
70
hdmboldt’s CUBA.
       ted their equality of social position, by saluting the,
       ladies, and paying them compliments in impudent
       and audible commendations of their beauty. The'
       insolence of the slaves'carried alarm into the bosom’
       of every family, and the public consequences were
       in consonance with the predictions which the Count
       de Villanueva, and the ayuntamiento of Havana had ;
       so truthfully and boldly laid before General Espar- !
       tero, when regent of Spain, in 1841.
          Men prepared for revolution as the only means of;
       self-preservation. Cubans and Spaniards united
       cordially in this determination, and preparations
       were made almost openly for the coming event.
       Some intimation of the occurrences probably came
       to the knowledge of General Pezuela, for a remon-
       strance against the new policy, signed by a large
       number of the most prominent citizens of Havana)
       was sent to Spain. At the same time he could not
       be ignorant of the excitement in the public mind,
       and he endeavored to allay it, by proclamation,'
       continuing at the same time to carry out the pre-
       viously prepared measures. The decree of 3d May,
       1854, directing the registry of the slaves, prepara-
       tory “to measures of a more transcendent nature,
       the approval of which, by her majesty, the queen,’!
       was expected, was introduced by a public address,'
                       1 Proclamation, 3d May, 1854.
                                            PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
71
 denying the existence of any treaty with a foreign
nation, “the basis of which is the emancipation of
the slaves,” and styling the rumors then agitating
the public mind, “a chattering and shameful war of
letters and lies.” The same public address con-
tained the remarkable announcement, that while the
government would fulfill its duty, “the inhabitants
of Cuba have another duty, not less sacred, to attend
to-—complying with the laws; it is time for it to
make the life of the creole negro more sweet than
that of the white, who, under another name, labors
to exhaustion in Europe.”
   This proclamation and decree only tended to
increase and confirm the public alarm, and it was
further augmented by a knowledge of the succeed-
ing measures of the government. On the 22nd of
May, General Pezucla directed the Bishop of
Havana to suspend the law of the Church interdict-
ing the marriage of whites with blacks, which was
accordingly done by a circular to the officiating
priests, dated 29th of that month.1 At the same
time a militia of free blacks and mulattoes was
directed to be organized2 throughout the island,
which was put upon an equal footing, with regard to
privilege, with the regular army.
   1 Secretaria del Obispado de la Ilabana, Circular No. 50.
   2 Ordenauza, 24th May, 1854.,
12
 humbolot’s ccba..
   In conjunction with those measures, the white
inhabitants were disarmed, the officers of the gov-
eminent collecting all the arms in possession of pri-
vate citizens. The popular ferment which followed
these measures alarmed General Pezuela, and on the
30th May, he issued his celebrated retracting pro-
clamation, announcing that the government would
not interfere with the social institutions of the coun-
try, for “that unhappy race which comprehend*
freedom to be vagrancy, * * once placed among,
civilized men, protected by religion, and by tW
great laws of our fathers, is, in its so-called slavery
a thousand times more happy than other classes i"
Europe, which have freedom only in name.” Th®
press, too, was silenced, and although Generi
Pezuela ceased from that time to initiate the netf
policy, the public alarm did not subside. The horn*
government, fearing, to lose its colony, at a tiiu*1
when its allies were too much engrossed by the di®
culties of the war in the East to assist it, removed
him, and conlided to General Concha, for the secofldj
time, the government of Cuba.
          The critical circumstances of the colony at tld*
         period, induced the court to grant more cxtraordin»l1
         powers to the new captain-general, than had be®*
         held by any of his predecessors. The heads of ^
         Treasury and Marine departments, which were f®1
                                              PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
73
merly co-equal with, are now subject to the captain-
general; and the authority, of all the local organiza-
tions has been greatly reduced, so that the governor
of Cuba now holds the most completely centralized
and irresponsible power in the New World.
   General Concha’s first care was to endeavor to
calm the public mind, and to reassure it of the
safety of the existing social institutions. In this he
in a great measure succeeded; but as none of the
measures instituted by General Pezuela have been
rescinded; as the black and mulatto troops have not
been disarmed, but have been made a permanent
corps of the Spanish army;1 and as no arms have
been returned, or allowed to the white inhabitants,
a jealous feeling of insecurity pervades the minds of
all reflecting men in Cuba; and the general impres-
sion is, that the new policy has only been delayed
to be renewed at a more opportune moment. Before
contemplating the possible future of the social ques-
tion in Cuba, we will present a few considerations
upon the composition of the two unmixed races.
   The black population of Cuba is composed of the
negroes born in the island, and a large number
which have been imported from the Gold coast, the
country around the mouth of the Congo river, and
                 General Order, 7th August, 1855.
74
 HUMBOLDT1 S CUBA..
 from Mozambique. It is difficult to ascertain its
exact numbers, as is shown in the chapter on popu-
lation in the following worlc, and there is great
diversity in the estimates of different statisticians.
Those who regard the smaller number as most relia-
ble, besides committing the error of adopting the
statistics of sugar planting for general application to
the country, place great reliance upon the disparity
in number of the sexes, and from this they assume a
necessary decrease of numbers in the total popula-
tion. In our reflections upon this disparity of the
sexes, we have observed two facts which we have
never seen presented in any argument upon the
question, and which we think have had an important
relation to the law of population in Cuba.
      The disparity between the sexes has arisen fro®
     the nature of the African slave-trade, which. 1®S|
     always brought a larger number of males that
     females; the proportions being, so far as our limited
     means of information enable us to judge, somewhetf
     between 4 to 1 and 5 to 1. Yet, notwithstanding tbfc
     disparity of the sexes arriving in Cuba, the propo1'
     tion of males to females among the negroes there,111
     1825, is set down by the accurate Humboldt, &
     1 to 1.7; and he recognizes the fact that an improve
     ment in this regard was going on. In fact, among ^
     negroes born in the island no disparity of the se*es
                                              PRELIMINARY JSS6AY.
75
 is found; this must, therefore, be sought among the
imported slaves, and its effect upon their numbers
ascertained.'
   The proportion of females imported by the slave
traders is, as we have stated somewhere, between
1 to 4 and 1 to 5. We believe we may safely assume
the ratio of 175 per 1,000 of all, an equal number
being also boys between ten and fourteen years of
age. The females imported by the slave traders are,
for obvious reasons, very nearly, or quite all, women
of the productive age, who have never borne child-
ren. This proportion of productive women is very
large, as will be seen by the statistics of this country.
Dr. Jarvis, in his letter’s to the Census Office, says,
 “ The females in Massachusetts, between twenty and
forty, in 1840, were 163 per 1,000 of all, and in
the United States 143 per l^OO.”1 By the consus
of 1850 the proportion of white females between the
same ages was 148 per 1,000 of all; and the propor-
tion of those between twenty and thirty, which
would approximate more nearly to, though still be
far from, equalling the class of females imported
among the slaves in Cuba, is only 81 per 1,000 of
all. It should also be remembered, in seeking for
the law of population in Cuba, that the female
               ' 1 Compendium of United States Census, p. 122, note.
76
                                         1
 HTJMBOBDT’s CUBA.
 slaves imported there are under more favorable con-
ditions for reproduction, than even those between
twenty and thirty, in the United States, from the fact
that, though they are of the productive age, a very
small portion of them have ever borne children.
   These facts lead us to believe that the conclusions
applicable to population in other countries, should be
modified in Cuba; and that in their effects may be
found, the explanations of the seeming contradictions
between the supposed necessary decrease of the slave
population, and the position and rapid advance of the
island in population and material prosperity. The
number of slaves in Cuba we estimate, as will be
seen in the chapter on population in the following
work, at about six hundred and sixty thousand.
Their character in general is that of a very docile
and obedient class, and the distinctions of their
several native tribes are kept up of their own accord.
To this number we have to add about two hundred
and twenty thousand free blacks and mulattoesi
making a total of eight hundred and eighty thousand
Africans and their descendants.
     The white, or European race, as we have termed
   it, numbers nearly five hundred and sixty-five thott'
   sand. The official tables of 1846 give the following
   as the numbers of the foreign born white population-
   Natives of Spain, 27,264 (exclusive of the army,
                                               PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
77
 which no' Cubans are admitted); Canary Islands,
19,759 ; other Antilles, 1,361; United States, 1,256 ;
other parts of America, 2,331; France, 2,066 ; Great
Britain, 605 ; other countries, 812.
   The Spaniards are very nearly all office-holders
and traders, it being seldom that they purchase land
or real estate. Wielding thus the power and ready
capital of the country, their political influence is
great, while their impress upon the social character
of the community is very limited. The natives of
the Canary Islands are largely engaged in the minor
branches of agriculture, and aSsimilato readily with
the native whites. Many of the French are plant-
el's of the English, a large number aro connected
with the mining interests. The great majority of
the American citizens in Cuba are machinists and
mechanics, in which class are also found large num-
bers of French and British subjects. To this fact we
trace the great contrast observed in the state of the
mechanic arts in Cuba and in the mother country,
and the much greater advance of the former in the
adoption of mechanical appliances to labor. The
machinists, carpenters, coopers, masons, carriage-
makers, smiths, &c., of Cuba, being mostly Ameri-
cans and French, or such as have learned the trades
in their shops, the manner of -labor, tools, and style
of work in Cuba, resemble ours much more than
78
                         humboldt’s cub*.
     they do . those of Spain, or of Spanish America, and
     have given to her civilization a resemblance totnat .
     of the Anglo-American, not found elsewhere out of ■
     the United States.
       This resemblance has been increased by the prox-'i
     imity.and frequency of intercourse between the two
     countries, by an identity of t.cial institutions and
     aspirations, and by the large number of Cuban youth
     educated here. It is estimated that for many years j
     yery nearly two thousand boys from Cuba have been |
     pursuing their studies in American schools. The
     ideas and manner of thought with which they return
     to the island, are more American than Spanish, and
     these are continually extended by their influence and j
     their example.                                    '
       Such is the social condition of Cuba, and the influ-'
     ences which bear upon it. In conclusion, we will '
     present a few considerations upon its possible future.
     "We have seen that Spain has declared that when th©■
     island ceases to be Spanish, it shall become African).
     and that there is good reason to believe that in vietf,
     of the impossibility of holding it many years longer,’
     she has acceded to the solicitations of other European ,
     powers, and consented to bring it under the rule of
     the social theories now prevailing in all the other
     European colonies in the Antilles. "We have seen that
     the people of Cuba now stand alone in their resistance
                                                 PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
T9
 to this social revolution and ruin. The advance of
the emancipation theories of Europe in the Antilles,
and the gradual extinction of the white race there, is
unmistakably indicated by the state of the British
West Indies. There we see at a glance the true ten-
dencies and results of the application of the social
theories of Europe to the communities of America.
The details of their history show the sufferings of the
whites, and the decline of public prosperity and
social welfare; and indicate an ultimate state of bar-
barism as the social condition of the West India
Islands. These truths are acknowledged by very
competent authority in Great Britain. One of the
leading London journals lately held the following
language on this subject.1
    “We have of late, as occasion served, directed the
attention of our readers to the condition of the most
valuable of our West India possessions, and have
endeavored to trace to its true source, in a vicious
and mistaken policy, the ruin which not only
impends, but has actually fallen upon those islands,
once the boast and glory of the British Crown—now
the by-word of the commercial riations of the earth.
Jamaica, by nature the richest of these dependencies,
is reduced to a state of collapse, from,which recovery
          1 London Morning Herald, 8th September, 1865.- !
80
                        humboldt's cuba.
    seems to be hopeless. Efforts have been made to
    stimulate once more her industry, to raise her crushed
    proprietary, and to give them once again opportunity
    and hope. So far those efforts have not been success-
    ful. In the recent advices we can perceive no
    symptoms of amendment; on the contrary, the
    downward tendency of affairs continues, as if for the
    unhappy Jamaicans there is a “lower deep” yet
    yawning, which “threatening, opens to devour,” and
    from whose frightful vortex thero seems to be no hope
    of escape.”
       ******
     “ Although the ruin of Jamaica has been more
    rapid and irresistible than any of the other islands,
    desolation rests upon the entire Archipelago, and
    sooner or later will involve them all.”
     This present desolation of the British Antilles is
    the dark future which the inhabitants of Cuba are
    called upon to .avert from themselves, and from
    their children, and which has impelled them to de-
    clare to the Spanish government, that the attempt
    to introduce there the social theories of European
    philanthropy must produce a bloody revolution, for
    no white man will be disposed to submit to so hard
    a fate. This revolution may soon degenerate to a
    war of races in Cuba, us Spain has declared her
                                                 PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
81
 reliance upon tho blacks, and other European powers
have instigated and sustained her in this declaration.
Such a war would arouse the sympathies of the
people of the United States in favor of the whites in
Cuba, to a pitch of popuiar excitement that has
never been witnessed, and no laws of neutrality or
considerations of policy, could prevent their imme-
diate and direct interference and assistance. The
result would be the utter annihilation of the black
race in Cuba, which might lead to a war of exter-
mination against them in all the larger Antilles.
Who can contemplate such a result without shud-
dering ? What philanthropy can advocate a policy
which must attain such terrible results!
   No public indications at present exist of a •dispo-
sition on the part of the powers of western Europe,
to abandon their attempts to extend over Cuba, the
theories which have ruined Jamaica and her'sister
colonies. Bather do they urge Spain to establish
them as the surest means of preventing the advance
of the American confederacy in that direction.
Thus is the social ruin of a neighboring island, one
of the contingents in the conflict between the Amer-
ican and European policies, between republicanism
and monarchism; and in the natural course of events
Cuba may yet become the Crimea, and Havana the
Sebastopol, of the New World.
        82                eumboldx’s ouba.
          The European manner of mis-stating that complex
        combination of questions of American international
        and civil policy, generally known as the Cuban
        Question, is thus adroitly and characteristically prac-
        tised, by one of the British reviews, most zealously
        liberal, after the manner of European liberalism.
          “ If then the slave States do gain Cuba, they may
        possibly gain a loss. If they conquer her they will
        find her emancipated or desolated; if they purchase
        her they will buy a colored population more in-
        subordinate than any they have now; and even if
        these dangers do not realize themselves, an economi-
        cal result, as Mr. Robertson well explains,1 may
        follow, by which the abolitionists may, after all, be
        the real gainers. Were Cuba once peacefully pos-
        sessed by enterprising Americans, the cultivation
        of her soil, and with it the demand for slaves,
        would be greatly increased, while one great source
        of supply, the African slave-trade, would be stopped.
        At the same time the insular population would de-
        crease rather than increase, by reason of the disparity
        of the sexes; the sole resource, therefore, would be
        the slave-breeding States of Virginia, North Carolina,
        and Maryland ; and the inducement to them to sell
         1 “ A Few Months in America, by James Robertson.” London,
        1855.
                                                  preliminary essay.
83
  would probably be so groat as to draw away their
  stock, until they became free States—a far greater
  gain to the North than Cuba would be to the South.
  Meantime, however, the slave party still desires
  annexation; it disregards or despises its dangers, or
  rather it loses sight of them in fear of what may
  happen, if it does not annex. Hero we have the
  true meaning of the Lone Star Lodges and Ostend
  Conferences. The Americans try to make the Cuban
  whites imitate them in casting off their allegiance to
  the mother country, because they fear that Spain
  will imitate us in compelling emancipation.”— West-
  minster Beview, July, 1855. Reprint, p.
    This is an adroit and characteristic mis-statement
  of the Cuban question. Its opening assumption that
  the northern and southern States of the American
  Union are opposed to each other in their vital inter-
  ests, is the artful insinuation of the defenders of
  European policy, in their opposition to American
  theories, but it is an error of fact. However groat
  may be the sectional jealousies and irritation, at the
  present time or in the past (for when have they
  ceased to exist ?), the vital interests of the North and
  the South are the same. The integrity of the terri-
  tory of the North, is the integrity of the territory of
  the South, and when the question of the northeastern
     84               iujmboldt’s  Cuba.
     boundary threatened a Hostile invasion of the State
     of Maine, at a time when the waves of sectional
     feeling ran fierce and high, the Soutli was as ready
     and as ardent in the determination to defend the
     national honor, and the national domain, as any
     other portion of the Union. So too, should any
     attempt be made upon the integrity of the territory
     of the South, or of the Pacific States, through our
     defenceless condition in the mid-American waters,
     and the Pacific Ocean, no one doubts that the great
     heart of the North would respond at once, and
     with enthusiasm, to the call of our common
     country.
       The same intimate sympathy between the North
     and the Soutli exists in their material interests. Do
     the seasons prove nnpropitious, and the crops of the
     South fail; the North feels the common loss in every
     pulsation of her commercial and fabrile industry.
     Do the grains and meats of the North and West,
     cease to come forward with their accustomed plenty;
     or do the ships of the East lie idly at the wharves;
     the South experiences the consequent languor in
     every nerve. The glorious memories of our land,
     too, are linked in sympathetic union ; Lexington and
     Bunker Bill, Saratoga and Monmouth, Yorktown
     and Port Moultrie, New Orleans and Plattsburg, are
     names equally dear to the North and to the South;
                                                    PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
85
 while the glorious achievements of our common
arms in Mexico, show only the most fraternal rivalry
to enhance the common glory. The confederacy is,
in fact, one mighty whole, and whoever will contem-
plate it apart from the mists of local politics, will
not fail to be impressed with this truth.
   The question of the accession of Cuba to the con-
federacy is not a local question, but stands upon this
broad national ground. It is pertinent not only to
the South, but to the East, North, and West. Is it
a question of national defence ? Cuba guards all the
approaches south of Charleston to our eastern na-
tional frontier. Is it a question of the safety of our
domestic intercourse? Cuba guarantees the safety of
the routes of commerce between the Ocean and the
Gulf of Mexico, and between the Atlantic and Pa-
cific States. The commercial and industrial relations
of Cuba to the United States, are also as national as
is her geographical position. The lumbermen, the
fisheries, and the shipping of New England, have a
deep present interest in her welfare, while the wants
of her people offer a great natural outlet to the man-
ufacturing industry of the same States, which is now
closed to them by artificial barriers.
   The miners, machinists, fanners, merchants, and
manufacturers of the Middle States, carry on, even
now, vast exchanges with her productive industry.
      86                humboldt’b ouba.
      The rice and lumber of the South find their greatest
      and best foreign market in Cuba. . The grain and
      moats of the West, now in a great measure shut out
      from Cuba by the restrictions of a jealous tariff,
      would find in her accession to the confederacy, a
      market to the value of millions annually from the
      store of their ever-increasing .plenty. Is it a ques-
      tion of civil or of international policy ? The exten-
      sion of our theories of government to Cuba must
      contribute to their stability, strengthen the ties of
      our civil policy, increase its moral power, and aug-
      ment our weight in the family of nations. The
      accession of Cuba to the Union is not, therefore,
      merely a Southern question, but it is a question of
      national gain and of national power.
        The assertion, that “ if they conquer her they will
      find her emancipated or desolated,” is the reiteration
      of the barbarous and savage threat of Spain—that ,
      “ Cuba shall ever remain Spanish or become African.”
      The heart that can conceive, and the liberalism that
      can reiterate, such a threat, are only worthy of the
      highest reprobation. But it involves an error of
      fact, in assuming that a disposition exists on the part
      of the United States to conquer Cuba. Such an idoa
      has never' been broached in this country, nor do we
      believe it has ever been entertained by any one.
      The truth is, that American sympathizers have been
                                                   PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
87
 willing to aid tlie people of Cuba in an effort to
conquer the Spanish power there.
    European writers, in contemplating the accession
of new countries to the American confederation, stu-
diously forget, or avoid the fact, that it is not some
powerful king, surrounded by courtiers and privi-
leged classes of nobility, extending his sway over
new conquests and subjugated nations; but it is the
extension of the right of self-government by the
people, and their integrity in the great arena of'
freedom, guaranteed by the jealous watchfulness of
the whole. Should the people of Cuba successfully
.assert their rights, and seek admission to the Amer-
ican confederacy, there would be no conquest but
that of right over might, and of freedom over oppres-
sion.
    That “ they may find her emancipated or deso-
lated,” that is to say, African, or a heap of moulder-
ing ashes, is apparently a bold threat; but to our
.view it is only the ebullition of fear and weakness.
We know that neither the liberalism nor the govern-
ments of Europe have ever recognized the existence
of the people of Cuba as a body politic; but this in
no wise affects its vitality, nor the influence which a
successful assertion of its rights may have upon itself,
or upon its relations to other powers. A people
numbering almost six hundred thousand free and
88
                              iiumboldt’s cuba.
      intelligent whites; inhabiting a country whoso area
      is very nearly equal to that of England proper; the
      productions of whose industry rule many of the
      most important markets of the world; whose geo-
      graphical position is one of the most marked upon
      the globe; and the ratio of whose industrial and.
      social progress is exceeded by only one among exist-
      ing nations, does not depend, for its being, upon its
      recognition in European reviews, or in cautiously-
      written, and guardedly-worded, diplomatic notes.
      The people of Cuba, by their labor, and the fertility
      of her soil, have already stamped the fact of their
      existence in unmistakable characters upon the in-
      dustrial world, and in the struggle for their rights,
      and for their very existence, which any attempt to
      carry out the barbarous threat thuB held forth by
      Spaniards, and by Englishmen, would surely create,
      the assertion of their rights would have a like effect
      upon their political relations with other nations.
        That if Spain relinquished her forcibly-maintained
      sovereignty over Cuba, by sale or treaty, to the
      United States, the confederacy would “ buy a colored
      population more insubordinate than any they now
      have,” is an assertion in regard to the future, which
      we do not deem justified by the general principles
      which regulate cause and effect.
        In what manner the transfer of a sovereignty from
                                                    PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
89
 Spain to a free people, in which the Cubans would be
included, would produce such a complete and radical
change in the disposition of her servile class, we are
not informed, and we cannot conceive. The relation
between master and slave is the same iu Cuba and
in the United States ; and if the European writer
draws his conclusion from a supposed savage dispo-
sition on the part of the native Africans, now in
Cuba, we think he judges them without a personal
knowledge of their character, that he forgets two
essential points; that they were not warriors, but
more slaves in Africa, and have never known any
other condition; and that they never have been
exposed, by community of language, and facility of.
access, to the bloodthirsty teachings of European
philanthropy.
   The economical anticipations of Mr. Robertson
and the reviewer may, or may not be realized ; but
we can have no great confidence in the anticipations
of the political economy of the European philan-
thropists, while we contemplate the disastrous results
which have attended the experiment of their social
theories in the British West Indies. On this point.
we would suggest to them a consideration of the
wise observations of Baron Humboldt, addressed to
those who anticipated direful results from the cessa-
tion of the slave-trade:
Humboldt’s ouba.
                                                                      90
       “ The prognostications which some too lightly
     make * * * do not seem to me. sufficiently conclu-
     sive. They do not take into, consideration the fact
     * * * that the increase .of the total population of.
     Cuba, when the importation of negroes from Africa
     shall have ceased entirely, is based upon elements so
     complicated, upon such various compensations of
     effect upon the white, free colored, and slave popu-
     lation * * * that we should not anticipate such
     mournful presages, but wait until positive statistical
     data have been obtained.”
       That “ the Americans try to make the Cuban whites
     imitate them in casting off their allegiance to the
     mother country, because they fear that Spain will
     imitate us in compelling emancipation,” is one of
     those mis-statements characteristic of European
     writers upon American questions. The desire of the
     people of Cuba for liberation from European thral-
     dom, is purely and entirely of Cuban origin. It was
     the natural desire of a people for that freedom which
     they contemplated in tire countries around them,
     and existed long before they turned their hopes to
     this country for assistance. The conspiracies that,
     from 1852 to 1828, threatened the existence of the
     Spanish power in Cuba, were the spontaneous growth
     of public feeling, as were those of 1835, under Gen.
                                                    PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
91
 Lorenzo, in St. Jago; and of Gen. Lopez, in 1848, in
Cieufuegos. The flight of Gen. Lopez and others to
the United States, upon the premature discovery of
their plans, first induced the patriots of Cuba to look
to the people of this country for assistance; and the
fact that they have found sympathy and aid here, is
the natural result of a community of political aspira-
tions and interests, and of the great American neces-
sity of resistance to the open and covert assaults of
European policy, upon our institutions and their
influence.
   Wo have alluded to this stereotyped European
statement, and argument of the Cuban question,
because we consider it aimed, not at the simple
question whether Cuba shall remain Spanish or not,
hut against the extension over new territories of
those principles of government, which are so suc-
cessfully maintained here, and of our political theo-
ries, which are viewed with so much dislike by the
advocates and defenders of European kingcraft. We
deem the question of the future social condition and
political relations of Cuba, as not only of pressing
and vital importance to herself, but as intimately
connected with the peace and progress of our own
confederacy, and through that with the ultimate
success of the republican theory of government.
   The idea that Cuba will some day belong to the
       92              uumboldt’s ouba.
       United States, exists solely from a contemplation of
       moral possibilities, and not from any admission of
       the fact by the European mind; and the statesmen
       of Europe are laboring strenuously to prevent its
       accomplishment. The policy of the British cabinet
       on this point is strikingly exhibited in Lord Palmer-
       ston’s assertion, that “if the negro population of
       Ouba were rendered free, that fact would create a
       most powerful element of resistance to any scheme
       for annexing Ouba to the United States.” In this
       he is undoubtedly right. Emancipation in Cuba
       would blot that country, and its productions, now so
       important in the commerce of all civilized nations,
       from the list of wealth-producing communities. It
       would call into existence, in immediate proximity to
       our southern shores, a negro community, under the
       influence of the European idea and policy, which
       would be dangerous to us as a neighbor, and worse
       than dangerous to us as a part of this confederacy;
       or, perhaps, worse still, it might initiate a war of
       races in Cuba, from a participation in which no
       power or considerations could prevent our people,
       and which might prove alike disastrous to the blacks
       in tho Antilles, and to our own domestic repose.
         In this question England is arrayed in hostility
       against us, for the questions of Emancipation and
       Slavery are the Scylla and Charybdis of our eon-
                                                    PRELIMINARY ESSAY.
93
 federacy, and if the class government that rules
Great Britain can make it a deadly hostility to us,
they are forced to do so by the very exigencies of
self-preservation. The statesmen of England know,
and so do those of America, that the race for life is
now being run by the broad and genial republican
theories of America, and the limited and partial
theories of that simulacro of freedom—European
constitutional monarchy. One or the other of these
systems must perish. If republicanism triumphs,
England must concede the five points to her people,
and seek her defence against the autocratic theories
of Europe, in a sincere friendship with America.
If constitutional monarchy triumphs, and this Union
is dismembered, the theory of a democratic repre-
sentative government will have failed before the
world, and the effete theories of Europe will pass
safely through the crisis that now attends them, and
receive new vigor from the scattered elements that
now constitute our vitality and moral power.
   It is because the aristocratic classes that govern
England are well aware of these truths, and see in
them the ultimate extinction of their class-system of
government, that Great Britain has never yet taken
the stand of true friendship to this country. When
impelled by interest, for a feeling of popular sym-
pathy has never impelled her to it, they have
94
 Humboldt’s cuba.
 acquiesced in a present seeming friendship. But
the retention of the frontier forts after the revolu-
tion; the intrigues in Europe against our early com- '• ,!
mercial treaties; the orders in council; the war of
1812; the treaty of Ghent, and the fishery question
at that time; the northeastern boundary; the Ore-
gon question; the efforts against our acquisition of
Texas; the intrigues in the war and treaty with
Mexico; the South Carolina correspondence; the
intrigues in Nicaragua and Dominica against us;
the questions of free trade with Canada, and of the
rights of our fishermen, afford demonstrations as
clear as any in Euclid of the animus that moves them. •
  . The Cuban question is the same disease in its
most aggravated and worst form. While Spain, un-
der the instigation of England, and supported by
that, power and France, is giving life and energy to
her hatred and their hostility to us, in the policy she
has adopted in Cuba, tho British cabinet may well
put on the mask of friendship, and assure us, as she
has already done on one occasion, that all will he
right with her fond ally Spain. And when the evil
is done, when the work of hate is consummated,
when Cuba has perished before the sirocco breath of
European philanthropy, and the seeds of dissension
and disunion are sown broadcast through the length
and breadth of this great confederacy, then may ’
                PRELIMINARY ESSAY.                95
England’s statesmen weep crocodile tears over our
misfortunes, and be sad, in mockery, at our fate.
The truth is, that England and France have not a
tithe of the fear of a war between this country and
Spain, that they have of the extension of our poli-
tical theories over Cuba, and the triumph of the
American theory—that States having dilferent social
organizations, can exist and prosper in political
union; and of the consequent consolidation of Amer-
ican power on this continent, and of its influence
throughout the world.
         HUMBOLDT’S CUBA.
                              CHAPTER I
                                 GENERAL VIEWS.
 Political importance of the island of Cuba and port of Havana
   —Their relations to contiguous countries—Increase of public
   wealth and revenue—Description of Bay and City of Havana—
   Public buildings—Streets—Public walks and grounds—Ashes
   of Columbus—Palms—Vicinity of Havana—Suburbs—Projected
   moat—Defences of Havana—Population—Hncrease—Marriages,
   births, and deaths—Hospitals—Health—Markets—Hospitality—
   {Notk — Establishment of Navy yard at Havana—Don Augustin
   de Arriola—List of ships built at Havana—Abandonment of the
   Navy-yard.]
  The political importance of the* island of Cuba
does not arise solely from its great extent, though it
is one half larger than Haiti, nor from the admirable
fertility of its soil, nor from its great naval resources,1
nor from the nature of its population, three-fourths
of which are freemen; hut it derives a far greater
                           1 See Note at the end of the chapter.
    98               humboldt’s cuba.
    political influence through the advantages ■which
    result from the geographical position of the city and
    harbor of Havana.
     That northern portion of the sea of the Antilles
    known as the Gulf of Mexico, forms a circular bay
    of more than two hundred and fifty leagues diameter,
    as it were, a Mediterranean with two outlets, 'Whose
    coasts from Cape Florida to Capo Catoche, in
    Yucatan, appertain exclusively, at the present time,
    to the confederations of the Mexican States and of
    North America. The island of Cuba, or more
    properly speaking, that part of its shore between
    Cape San Antonio and the city of Matanzas, situate
    near the entrance of the old Bahama channel, closes
    the Gulf of Mexico on the southeast, leaving to the
    oceanic current we call the Gulf Stream, no other
    passages than a strait on the south, between Cape
    San Antonio and Cape Catoche, and the Bahama
    channel on the north, between Bahia Honda and
    the reefs of Florida.
       Near to the northern outlet, and immediately
     where a multitude of highways thronging with the
     commerce'- of the world cross each other, lies the
     beautiful port of Havana, strongly defended by
     nature, and still more strongly fortified by art.
     Fleets sailing from this port, built in part of the
     cedar and mahogany of Cuba, may defend the
                                                     GENERAL VIEWS.
09
 passages to the American Mediterranean and menace
the opposite coasts, as the fleets sailing from Cadiz
may hold the dominion of the ocean near the
Columns of Hercules. The Gulf of Mexico, and the
old and new Bahama channels unite under the
meridian of Havana. The opposing flow of their
currents, and the violent atmospherical agitations
natural there, particularly at the beginning of
winter, give a peculiar character to this spot on the
northern boundary of the equinoctial zone.
   The island of Cuba is not only the largest of the
Antilles (being nearly equal to England proper
without the principality of Wales), but from its long
and narrow form, its great extent of coast makes it
at once contiguous with Haiti, Jamaica, Florida
(the southern State of the United States), and
Yucatan, the eastern State of Mexico. This circum-
stance is worthy of the most mature consideration,
for these countries (Cuba, Jamaica, Haiti, and the
southern portions of the United States, from Louisiana
to Virginia), distant but a few days’ sail from each
other, contain nearly two millions eight hundred
thousand Africans. As St. Domingo, Florida, and
Mexico have been separated from Spain, Cuba does
not assimilate politically with the countries it
borders, although as they were for many ages subject
to the same laws, it has a similarity of religion,
language, and customs.
100
MJMBOIJU'S CUBA..
       Florida forms the most southern link of that great
     chain of republics whose northern boundary touches
     the upper waters of the river St. Lawrence, and
     which extends from the region of palms to that of
     the most rigorous winter. The inhabitants of New
     England believe that the progressive increase of the
     blacks, the preponderance of the States they inhabit,
     (the slave States,) and a preference for the culture of
     the colonial staples, are public dangers. Therefore,
     they do not wish to cross the Straits of Florida, the
     present boundary of the great American confederacy,
     except for the purposes of a free commerce based
     upon an equality of rights. It is true they fear any
     event which may throw Cuba into the hands of a
     more formidable European power than Spain, but
     undoubtedly they desire no less strongly that the
     ties which formerly bound Cuba to Louisiana, Pensa-
     cola, and St. Augustine, shall remain for ever broken.
       The vicinity of Florida has never been of much
     importance to the trade of Havana, from the sterility
     of her soil and her want of inhabitants and cultiva-
     tion. But this is not the caso with respect to the
     coasts of .Mexico, which, extending in a semi-circle
     from the more frequented ports of Tampico, Yera
     Cruz, and Alvarado to Cape Catochc, almost join
     through the peninsular of Yucatan to the western
     portion of Cuba. The illicit trade between Havana
     and the port of Campeachy is not only very active,
                                                   GENERAL VIEWS.
101
 but is increasing, notwithstanding the efforts of the
new government of Mexico against it; for of the
many vessels engaged in the contraband traffic with
Havana, but a small number arc engaged in the
traffic with the more distant coasts of Caraccas and
Colombia. The necessary supplies of salted meats
(jerked beef), for the slaves in Cuba, are procured
from Buenos Ayres and the plains of Merida more
easily, and with less danger in these unquiet times,
than from Cumaua, New Barcelona, or Caraccas.
   It is well known that Cuba and the Archipelago
of the Philippine Islands have for centuries drawn
from the treasury of Mexico the sums necessary for
their internal administration, and for the preserva-
tion of their fortifications, their arsenals and their
navy yards. Havana has been the naval port of
Mexico, as I have stated in another work,1 and
received annually (until 1808) from its treasury more
than one million eight hundred thousand dollars.
 . 1 “ In the present state of affairs, (1803-4), the coast of Mexico is
a military dependence of Ilavana, which is the only neighboring
port that affords shelter to squadrons; it is therefore the most
important point in the defence of the eastern shores of Mexico. For
this reason the government lias expended enormous sums in its forti-
fication since its capture by the English. The court of Madrid, fully
aware of its own interests, lias established the principle that in
order to preserve Mexico, the dominion of the island of Cuba must
be maintained.”—Humboldt. *(Political Essay on New Spain”
     102         ' humboldt’s cuba.
     Even in Madrid, for a long time, Cuba and the Phi-
     lipine Islands were considered as dependencies of
     Mexico, situa^ -d at distances widely apart, east and
     w'est from the ports of Vera Cruz and Acapulco, but
     iinited to the Mexican metropolis, which was then a
     European colony, by all the tics of commerce, of
     mutual assistance, and of ancient affection.
       The increase of her own proper wealth has gradu-
     ally made this assistance from the Mexican treasury
     unnecessary to Cuba. Of all the Spanish possessions
     she has been the most prosperous, and the port of
     Havana has risen, since the disasters of St. Domingo,
     to the rank of a first-class mart in the commercial
     world. A happy concurrence of political circum-
     stances, the moderation of the government oflicials,
     and the conduct of the inhabitants, who are keen,
     prudent, and careful of their own interests, have pre-
     served to Havana the continued enjoyment of a free
     interchange with foreign nations. The revenue from
     her customs has increased so greatly, that Cuba not
     only covers her own expenditures, but during the
     war between Spain and her continental colonies, has
     contributed large sums to relieve the remnants of the
     army from Venezuela, for the defence of tho castle
     of San Juan de Ulua, and to the costly and most
     generally fruitless naval armaments that Spain has
     fitted out.
                                                    GENERAL VIEWS.
103
   I have been twice in Cuba, on one occasion three
months, and on the other a month and a half, and
have had the good fortune to enjoy the confidence
of persons, who from their talents and position,
either as proprietors, administrators, or merchants,
could give me reliable information regarding the ad-
vance of public prosperity. This confidence flowed
from the favor with which I was honored by the
Spanish ministry, and I trust that I also merited it
for the moderation of my principles, my circumspect
conduct, and for the pacific character of my occu-
pation. For the last thirty years the Spanish gov-
ernment has not obstructed the publication, even in
Havana, of the most interesting statistical tables
relative to the state of the commerce, colonial agri-
culture, and revenue of Cuba. I obtained copies of
these documents during my stay there, and the rela-
tions I have preserved with America since my return
to Europe, have afforded me the complement of the
data I had previously collected.
 ' I visited in company with Bonpland only the vici-
nity of Havana, the beautiful valley of Gruines, and
the coast between Batabano and Trinidad. After
describing succinctly the physical aspect of the coun-
try, and the singular modifications of a climate so
different from that of the other Antilles, I shall speak
of the general population of the island, its area cal-
  • 104               humboldt’s  cub a.
    culated from the most exact delineation of its shores,
    its staples of product and commerce, and the condi-
    tion of its public revenues.
      The view of Havana from the entrance to the port
    is one of the most picturesque and pleasing on the
    northern equinoctial shores of America. This view,
    so justly celebrated by travellers of all nations, does
    not possess the luxury of vegetation that adorned
    the banks of the Guayaquil, nor the wild majesty of
    the rocky coasts of Eio Janeiro, two ports in the
    southern hemisphere; but the beauty that in our cli-
    mate adorns the scenes of cultivated nature, unites
    here with the majesty of the vegetable creation, and
    with the organic vigor that characterizes the torrid
    zone. The European who experiences this union of
    pleasing impressions, forgets the danger that mena-
    ces him in the midst of the populous cities of the
    Antilles, and strives to comprehend the different ele-
    ments of so vast a country, gazing upon the fortress-
    es crowning the rocks east of the port, the opening
    arm of the sea surrounded with villages and farm-
    houses, the tall palms, and the city itself half hid-
    den by a forest of Spars and sails of shipping.
      The entrance to the harbor of Havana passes be-
    tween the Morro Castle ( caslos Santos Reyes)
    and the fort of Sm Salvador da la Punta; its width
    is from 360 to 450 yards which it preserves for three-
                                                           GKNKBAJ, VIEWS.
105
 fifths of a mile, when, leaving on the north the Cas-
tle of   San Carlos de la Cabana, and the village of
 Casa Blanca, it opens into a large trefoil shaped bay,
the greatest width of which, from N. N. E. to S. S.
 W. is two miles and a half. The three smaller bays
which open from it are called Guanabacoa, Guasaba-
coa, and Atares, the latter containing several springs
of fresh water.
    The city of Havana, surrounded by walls, is built
upon a promontory, extending from the Navy-yard
on the south, to the Punta fort on the north. In the
harbor, beyond the remains of some vessels that have
been sunk and the little isle of Luz, there are only
eight or ten, or, perhaps, more correctly speaking,
five or six fathoms of water. The castles Atares
and San Carlos del Principe defend the city bn the
western side inland, one of them being 1,400 and
the other 2,630 yards from the wall of the city. The
intermediate space comprises the suburbs of Ilorcon, '
Jesus Maria, and Salud, which encroach yearly upon
the Campo Marto.
    The principal edifices of Havana, the Cathedral,
the Government House, the residence of the Com-
andante of Marine, the Navy-yard, the Post-office,
and the Royal Tobacco factory, are less notable for
their beauty than for the solidity of their construc-
tion. The streets are generally narrow, and many
5*
     100                 uumboldt’s  cuba.
     of them not paved. As the paving stone is brought
     from Yera Cruz, and its transportation is costly, the
     singular idea had been entertained, shortly before
     my arrival, of supplying its place with great trunks
     of trees, as is done in Germany and Russia, in the
     construction of dikes across swampy places. This
     project was speedily abandoned; but travellers who
     arrived subsequently to the making of the experi-
     ment, were surprised to see beautiful trunks of
     mahogany buried in the ruts of Havana.
       During my residence in Spanish America few of
     the cities presented a more disgusting appearance
     than did Havana, from the want of a good police.
     One walked through the mud to the knees, and the
     many carriages, or volmtes, which are the charac-
     teristic carriages of this city, and the drays laden
     with boxes of sugar, their drivers rudely elbowing
     the passer-by, made walking in the streets both vex-
     atious and humiliating.1 The offensive odor’of the
     salted meat, or tascyo, infected many of the houses,
     and even some of the ill-ventilated streets. It is
     said the police have remedied these evils, and that
       1 These evils have since that time been in a very great measure
     remedied, and Havana is now as well paved, and lighted with gas as
     the best regulated city of America or Europe, while a better police
     Bystem has removed many of the inconveniences of walking in tho
     streets.
                                                              GEN Ell AL VIEWS,
107
 lately there lias been a marked improvement in the
cleanliness of the streets. The houses are well ven-
tilated, and the street de los Mercaderes presents a
beautiful view. There, as in many of our older cities
in Europe, the adoption of a bad plan when laying
out the city can only be slowly remedied.
   There are two good promenades; one, the Ala-
meda, inside the walls, between’ the theatre and the
hospice of Paula; and the other outside the walls,
running from the Punta fort to the Muralla gate.
The first was ornamented with much taste by Peru-
ani, an Italian artist, in 1803; and the second,
known as the extra-mural paseo, is a delightfully
cool resort, and generally after sunset is filled with
carriages. Its construction was commenced by the
Marquis de la Torre, who, of all the governors sent
to Cuba, was the first to give an impulse to the im-
provement of the police and the municipal regimen of
Havana. Don Luis de las Casas, whose memory is
also held in high esteem by the inhabitants of
Havana, and the Count de Santa Clara, have both
improved these grounds.1
                The botanical garden, near Campo Marte, is wor-
    1 A third beautiful paseo, with gardens, was added to these in
  1836, by General Tacon; and subsequent governors have improved'
  the old roads and opened several new ones around Havana ; bo that
  its vicinity now aiYords many delightful drives.
108 •
HUMROLDt’B CUBA.
   thy of the attention of the government. Since my
   return to Europe a marble statue of Carlos III. lias
   been erected in the extra-muralpasco. Its site had
   been first selected for a monument to Columbus,
   whose ashes were brought to Havana on the cession
   of the Spanish part of St. Domingo to the French.
   The remains of Hernan Cortes having been carried
   during the same year (1790) from one church in
   Mexico to another, there occurred the coincidence
   of a re-interment at the same time, near the close of
   the eighteenth century, of the two greatest of the
   men who were made illustrious by the discovery
   and conquest of America.1
     1 “ The line-of-battle ship, San Lorenzo, arrived at Havana on the;
   15th January, 179G, bearing, in a rich coffin, the venerated ashes of
   Columbus. Generals Las Casas and Araoz and bishops Trcspalacios
   and Pcfialver received them on the shore, amid the entire garrison
   formed for the occasion, and deposited them with solemn ceremo-
   nials in their resting-place in the cathedral, in that humble niche
   where they still repose.7’—Pczuda Ensayo Ilistwico dc Cuba, page
   35b “ The bones of Cortes were secretly removed from the church
   of San Francisco with the permission of bis excellency the arch-
   bishop, on the 2d July, 179-1, at eight o’clock in the evening, in the
   carriage of'‘the governor, the Marquis de Sierra Nevada, and were
   placed in a vault made for this purpose in the church of Jesus of
   Nazareth. The bones were deposited iu a wooden coffin inclosed, in
   one of lead, being the same in which they came from Castilleja de la
   Cuesta, near Seville. This was placed in another of crystal, with its
   crossbars and plates of silver, and the remains were shrouded in a
                                                            CrENKKAL VIEWS.
109
    The royal palm, one of the most majestic of its
species, give a peculiar character to the country in
the neighborhood of Havana. It is the Oveo&oxia
regia in my classification of American palms; its tall
trunk, slightly swelling near the middle, is from
sixty to eighty feet high; the upper portion being
of a fresh, shining green color, forms the union and
extension of its pedicles, contrasts with the rest of
the trunk, which is of a whitish-brown, and shrunken,
forming, as it were, two columns, one supporting the
other. The royal palm of Cuba has a beautiful pin-
natifid leaf, which shoots upward, and bends only
near its point.
    The description of this palm reminds me of the
Vadgiai palm, that covers the rocks, and waves its
long leaves amid a cloud of spray, at the cataracts
of the Orinocco. Those groves of palms that gave
mo such delight in the vicinity of Havana and Regia
are waning year after year, and the low-grounds which
I beheld covered with the waving bamboo, are being
drained and cultivated. Civilization advances with
rapid pace, and I am told that even in those places
yet bare of cultivation, there exists but few remains
of their former wild abundance.
 winding-sheet of cambric, embroidered with gold, with a fringe of
black lace four inches deep.”—Prescott's Conquest of Mexico, vol.'
III. Appendix, p. 409.
    110             uumboldt’s ouba.
      From the Punta to San Lazaro, from the Cabana
    to Regia, and from thence to Atarcs, the land is
    filled with habitations; those which surround the
    bay being of light and elegant construction. The
    plan of these houses is drawn, and they are ordered
    from the United States, as one would order any piece
    of furniture. When the yellow fever prevails at
    Havana, the inhabitants retire to these country-
    houses, and to the lulls between Regia and Guana-
    bacoa, where they breathe a purer air. In the cool
    nights, when the boats crossing the bay leave behind
    them a long track of phosphorescent light, the in-
    habitants, who abandon .the populous city, find in
    these rustic abodes a peaceful and enchanting pri-
    vacy. Travellers who wisli to judge truly of the
    progress of agriculture, should examine the small
    patches of maize and other alimentary plants, the
    pine-apples in long files in the fields of the Cruz de
    Piedra, and the vegetation of the bishop’s garden,
    which has lately been converted into a most delight-
    ful place.
      The city of Havana proper is surrounded by walls,
    and is about 1,900 yards long by 1060 yards wide;
    and yet there are piled in this narrow space 44,000
    people, of which 26,000 are blacks and mulattos. A
    nearly equal population is gathered in the two
    suburbs, Jesus Maria and Salud; but the latter
                                                     GLmitAL views.
Ill
 does not merit the beautiful name it bears (signify-
ing Health); for, although the temperature of the
air is lower than in the city, the streets might have
been wider, and better laid out.
    The Spanish engineer corps lias been for the last
thirty years making war upon the inhabitants of the
suburbs, complaining to the government that the
houses are too near the fortifications, and that an
enemy might hold possession of them with impunity.
But no one has sufficient firmness to raze the
suburbs and eject the inhabitants, of which there
arc 28,000 in that of Salud alone. This ward has
increased largely since the great fire of 1802, for
although sheds only were at iirst erected, these have
since been replaced by houses.
    The -inhabitants of the suburbs have laid many
plans before the court by which they might be
included within the line of the fortifications of the
city, and thus obtain a confirmation of their titles to
the land which they have hitherto held only by
tacit consent.
    Some propose that a wide moat shall be cut from
the Chaves bridge, near the shambles, to the San
Lazaro shore. The distance is' about 2550 yards,
and the harbor now terminates at the bridge of
Chaves, between the navy-yard and the castle of
Atares, in a natural brook, the banks of which are
112
HUMBOLDT'S CUBA.
        covered with mangroves and reeds. The city would
        then have on the west a triple line of fortifications;
        first, outward, the works of Principe and Atarcs,
        built upon hills; then the projected moat; and
        lastly, the old wall, with its curtain, built by
        Count Santa Clara, at a cost of seven hundred thou-
        sand dollars.
           The defence of Havana, on the western side, is of
        the greatest importance, for while the city proper
        and the southern side of the bay is held, the Morro and
        Cabana castles are impregnable. The first of these
        requires a garrison of 800 men, and the second 2,000
        men for their defence, provisions for which, and
        reinforcements, should the garrison suffer heavy
        losses, can be supplied from the city. Several able
        French engineers have assured me that au enemy
        should begin by taking the city, and then bombard
        the Cabana, which is very strong, but whose
        garrison, shut up in the casemates, could not long
        resist the sickly climate. The English took the
        Morro before they had possession of Havana, but at
        that time, the Cabana, which commands the Morro,
        and fort Number 4, had not been built. The castles
        of Principe and Atares, and the battery of Santa
        Clara, are the most important works on the southern
        and western sideB of the city.
           Population of Havana, including the suburbs,
                                                    GENERAL VIEWS.
113
 Salud, Jesus Maria, Ilorcon, Oerro, San Lazaro,
Jesus del Monte, and Regia, in 1810.1
                   Males. Females. Total* 
Whites,.......  . .20,G8G 20,541   41,227 
Free colored,..  ..11,031 14,318   25,979 
SI ayes,......  ...15,327 13,581   28,908 
Total,             47,644 48,470   96,114 
   The land and naval forces, the monks and nuns,
and foreigners not domiciliated (transient persons),
are not included in tlio census of 1810. The figures
of this census have been referred to erroneously in
works otherwise worthy of credit, as corresponding
to the year 1817. The garrison of Havana is usually
six thousand men, and the number of foreigners
20,000, so that the population of Havana, with its
seven suburbs, doubtless at the present time (1825)
exceeds 130,000 souls. The following table shows
the increase of Havana and its suburbs between the
years 1791 and 1810:
 1 The same by the official census of 1846:—
                  Males. Females.  Total. 
Whites,......  ...89,581   80,584  70,115 
Free colored,. ...13,281   18,027  31,20S 
Slaves, ...... ...14,088   12,022  26,110 
    Total,        66,900   60,588 127,433 
114             humboldt’s cuba.
                                             Proportions of    
          Whitos. F. Colored. Slaves. Total. the three classes 
      1791 23,737    9,751    10,849  44,337      53---22---25 
      1810 41,227   25,979    28,908  96,114      43---27---30 
Increase,. 17,490   10,228    17,059  51,777                   
Increase of Whites, 73  
      “ F. Colored, 171 
     “ Slaves,      165 
     “ all classes, 117 
         We find that the population has more than doubled
      in the twenty years from 1791 to 1810, in which time
      the population of New York, the largest city of the
      United States, has risen from 33,200 souls to 96,400,
      and at the present time (1825) reaches 140,000, being
      consequently a little larger than Havana, and nearly
      equal to Lyons.
         We cannot doubt that the great accumulation of
      unacclimated foreigners in a confined and populous
      city augments the mortality, and yet notwithstand-
      ing the effects of the yellow fever, in the compari-
      son of births and deaths, the results are’much less
      affected by it than are commonly supposed. When
      the number of blacks imported is not large, and the
      activity of trade does not bring together at one time
      a large number of unacclimated sailors, the number
      of births very nearly equals the number of deaths.
                                                    GENERAL VIEWS.
115
 We prosent here a statement of marriages, births,
and deaths in Havana for five years :
     Marriages. Births. Deaths 
1813    38G      3,525   2,948 
1814    390      3,470   3,G22 
1820    525     4,495    4.833 
1821   . 397     4,320   4,4GG 
1824    397     3,5 6 G  G,697 
   This tablo, which shows great fluctuations from
the unequal influx of foreigners, gives a mean pro-
portion of births to the population as 1 to 33.5; and
of deaths as 1 to 33.2, estimating the total popula-
tion of Havana and suburbs at 130,000 souls. Ac-
cording to recent exact estimates of the population
of France, the proportions there are as 1 to 33f, and
1 to 39|; .and for Paris from 1819 to 1823 as 1 to
28, and 1 to 31.6.
   The principles upon which these calculations aro
based, aro so modified by circumstances in populous
cities, and those are of a nature so complicated and
variable, we cannot judge of the number of inhabit-
ants by that of births and deaths. In 1806, when
the population of the City of Mexico slightly ex-
ceeded 150,000, the number of deaths and births
there was respectively 5,166 and 6,155, while in
Havana with 130,000 souls, tlio mean number is
3,900 and 3,880.
116
 iiumboldt’s cuba.
   There are two hospitals in Havana, the public hos-
pital (San Felipe y Santiago), a charitable institution,
and the military hospital (San Ainbrosio), in both of
which the number of patients is quite large. The
following'table shows their operations:
San Ambrosio.             San Felipe y Santiago.
                  1814. 1821. 1824. 1814. 1821. 1824. 
No. on 1st Jan’y. 22 G  307     264   153   251   127 
‘ Admitted during                                     
    the year,     4,352 4,829 4,160 1,484 2,596 2,19G 
Total,            4,578 5,136 4,424 1,637 2,847 2,323 
Deaths,           164   225     194   283   743   533 
Cured,            4,208 4,623 3,9GG 1,224 1,948 1,651 
Remaining,        206   283     264   130   156   139 
   The mean of annual deaths in the public hospital
is more than 24 per cent., while in the military hos-
pital it is barely 4 per cent. This great difference
must not be attributed to the method of treatment
employed by the friars of San Juan de Dios, who
control the first-named establishment, for though :
doubtless more yellow fever patients are admitted to
the hospital of San Ambrosio, the greater part of the
patients received there have slight, and indeed insig-
nificant disorders ; while the public hospital on the
contrary, admits the aged, the incurable, and blacks
who having but a few months to live, are placed
there by their owners to rid themselves of caro.
                                                           GENEltAL VIEWS.
117
   As a general tiling, it may be supposed that, with
the police improvements, the salubrity of Havana
has also improved; but the effects of these changes
can only be really observed among the native popu-
lation, for foreigners, who go there from Europe and
North America, must suffer from the general influ-
ence of the climate, and they will continue to suffer
even though the streets were as carefully cleaned as
could be desired. The sea-shore has such an influ-
ence, that even the natives of the island who reside
in the country, far from the coast, are subject to
attacks with the yellow fever when they visit
Havana.
   The markets of the city are well supplied. In
1819 a careful estimate was made of the value
of the produce brought daily to Havana by two
thousand beasts of burden* and it was found that
the consumption of meats maize, yuca, vegeta-
bles, rum, milk, eggs, forage, and segars, amounted
annually to $4,480,000.
   We passed the months of December, January and
February, making observations in the vicinity of
Havana, and in the beautiful plain of Giiines. We
found in the Cuesta family, which, with that of Santa
Maria, forms, one of the largest commercial houses
in America, and in the house of Count O’Tteilly, the
most’noble and generous hospitality. We lodged at
118
                              nUMBOLD'r’s CUBA.
    tlie residence of the first-named, and placed our1
    instruments and our collections of specimens in the
    palace of the Count, the broad flat roofs of which •
    were exceedingly convenient for our astronomical
    observations.
      [Note.       NAVY-YARD AT  HAVANA.
      The great advantages which the port of Havana
    affords for repairing and building ships were apparent
    at an early period. Its admirable position made it a
    port of call for all the ships navigating those seas,
    and it was the place of refit and final departure of
    the galleons for Spain. But neither the government
    nor private individuals availed themselves of its
    abundant timber and naval resources, until about
    the year 1620, when the king* ordered several vessels ;
    to be built there for the service of the windward
    station, of which it was the head-quarters. After .
    these were completed the government built no more .
    vessels there for a long time, although private enter-
    prise continued the business until the king prohibited
    the cutting of timber except for the purpose of
    building or repairing of houses in the city.
      In 1713 Don Augustin de Arriola went to Madrid,
    for the purpose of inducing the government to cstab- ■
    lisli a navy-yard at Havana, and proposed to build
    there ten ships of the line, which should serve as
                                                    GENERAL VIEWS*
119
 convoys for the galleons and fleets from Mexico.
He urged upon the court that ships built of the
hard woods of Cuba, would be much more durable
than those built of European timber, and that they
would also be preferable, for the reason that the
timber would not splinter in battle, and consequently
the ships were safer for the crews. His efforts were
for a long time unsuccessful, and it was not until
about 1723 the present navy-yard was established,
and ship-building permanently undertaken. For
noarly three-quarters of a century Havana was the
great nursery of the Spanish Armada, and from the
year 1724 until 1796, the following ships were built
there:—
  1724  San Juan.....................ship  of the line.* 50 guns.
  1725  San Lorenzo................... “                   50 “
  172G  San Gcronimo (a) El Retiro ..       “              50 “
  172G  San Antonio  (a) El Triunfo.......mail ship.       1G “
  1727  N. S.de Guadalupe (a) El Fuerte, ship of the line. GO "
  1727  Santa Barbara (a) la Chata..........corvette. 22
  1728  San Dionisio (a) El Constante, ship of the line. 54 “
  1730  El Marte..........................mail ship.       1G “
        El Jupiter    ................ . u                 16 4<
        Nucstra Senora del Carmen_____three-decker. G4 “
  1731  Segundo Constantc.  .  ....... u                   GO  “
  1733  El Africa..................... “                   GO 44
  1734  LaEuropa ..................... “                   GO 41
  1735  El Asia ...................... “                   G2 “
        La Esperanaa........................frigate. 50   "
120             humboldt’s Cuba.
1735     El Triunfo ..............                       24 guns.  
173G     La America ..............                       62 tt     
1737     La Estrella................                     24 tt     
738      La Casilla .................                    60 a      
         El Dragon.................   «                  60 n      
1739     La Bizarra...............                       50 tt     
1710     El Invcncible.... .........                     70 a      
         El Glorioso...............   it                 70 <(     
1743     La Nueva Espana..........    a                  70 ((     
         El Nuevo Invencible .        a                  70 tt     
1745     El Nuevo Conquistador.....   a                  64 a      
         Santa Teresa de Jesus......  a                  64 a      
1746     El Nuevo Africa.........     li                 70 tt     
         El Vfinendor , ............. U                  70 a      
1747     La Elora .......                                24 tt     
         El Tigrc..................    .. .three-decker. 70 tt     
1749     El Epnix ...........                            80 u      
                                      u                  80 u      
1750     El Infante . ............    u                  70 «      
                                           three-decker. 70 «      
                                                         70 tt     
1757     El Trmnfn .........                             16 (i     
1758     Santa Barbara............    ........corvette.  18 u      
         El Cazador...............                       18 a      
1759     El Astute...............,,                      60 u      
17G0     *E1 Yolante................  ........mail-ship. 18 n      
1761                                                     22 tt     
X t U jL                              ........schooner.  14 a      
                                      .....three-decker. 60 tt     
                                      u                  60 it     
                                                         14 it     
17G5                                  .....three-decker. 80 tt     
              general views.
121
  1765  Ban Julian.............—
        San Fernando............
  1766  San Joaquin ............
        San ....................
        San Lorenzo .. .........
  1767  San Antonio de Padua----
        Santa Clara.............
        Santa Ysabol... ........
        San Luis................
        Santa Rosalia...........
  1768  San Francisco de Paula...
  1769  San Francisco de Paula..
        La Santissima Trinidada..
        San Jose................
  1769  San ....................
  1770  Nuestra Senora de Loreto
        Santa Lucia ............
          El Cayman'............
    1771  San Rafael............
          San Pedro Alcantara
    1772  San Juan Bantista.....
          San Francisco Xavier .. -
          Santa Elena...........
          San Carlos............
    1773  San Miguel............
    1775  San Roman ;...........
          San Julian............
          San Salvador de Orta..
    1776  Santa Aguedn..........
          Santa Catalina Martir .
    ^777 Santa Cecilia .........
    1778 Santa Matilda..........
.....schooner. 16 guns
.. throc-decker. 80 “
.....schooner, 16 "
..three-decker. 60 “
.....schooner. 16     «
..... “           16  «
..... “           10   “
..... “           10  «
.. three-decker. 80 u
......schooner. 16 “
.....mail-ship. 18 M
...three-decker. 70 u
ship of the line. 112 «
.......schooner. 12 “
.ship of the line. 70 «
......schooner. 12 u
........corvette. 26 “
. .xebec frigate. 30 u
. ship of the line. 70 “
         u 62 «
.............brig.  12   «
............. “ 12 “
........schooner.
........mail-ship. 18 «
. .ship of the line. 70 “
. .ship of the line. 60 “
. dredging ligh ter.
         u
..........frigate. 46 “
. .... . ..brig, 10 “
.        .frigate,   46   u
.................... 4g  "
                                 6
122
HUMBOLDTS CUBA.
1778 Santa Teresa..............                                
Nuestra Senora de la 0.....                                    
1780 Santa Clara................. ........ « 40 “              
El Bahama .................       ship of the line. 70 “       
El Yiento.................                                     
1781 La B-(illegible on record).  a                            
1782 Borja......................                               
San Pedro.............,..         . .receiving-ship.           
San Pablo...............          a                            
1786 El Mejicano................  .ship of the line. 114 “     
Conde de Regia...........         “ 114 “                      
La Guadalupe ......                                            
1787 Real Carlos................  ..ship of the line, 114 “    
La Catalina.......;.......                                     
1788 San Pedro Alcantara........  , .ship of the line. 64 u    
Nuestra Sefiora de la Merced                                   
1789 San Hermenegildo ........    . .ship of the line. 120 il  
Atocha...................                                      
San Geronimo.......               . .ship of the line. 64 “    
1790 El Volador ...............   ,,..........brig. 18 “       
El Soberano...............        .ship of the line. 74 u      
Minerva..................                                      
Saeta................,,..         .............brig. 18 “      
1791 Dredging ship. ... No 1.                                  
« ____« 2.                                                     
*4 Dredging lighters “ 1, 2,      3, and 4.                    
El Infante Don Pelayo ....                                     
La Ceres.................                                      
1792 La Gloria, .„.............   ......... « 44 “             
1793 El Principe de Asturias---   .. .ship of the line. 120 il 
1794 San Antonio.; \ . .......                                 
1796 La Anfitrite.............    ..........frigate. 44 “      
GENERAL VIEWB.            123
Forming a total of                            
Ships of the line..........              3G42 
Frigates..................                684 
Corvettes.................  ..........7   100 
Mail-ships.......... .....                116 
Brigs.......... .......                   136 
Schooners................                 164 
Receiving ships...........                    
Dredging “ ............                       
“ lighters ..........       ...........6      
                                     114 4902 
       A few years since, the labors at the navy-yard of
    Havana were resumed; a machine shop was esta-
    blished, and a steamer, a sloop of wrar, and several
    smaller vessels were built; but they were again
    suspended by a royal decree, and the fixed machinery
    and ship-timber were taken to Cadiz. Vessels of the
    station are now only repaired here. The reason
    assigned for this is that ship-building in Cuba
    deprives the labor of the mother country of employ-
    ment.]
124
                       HUMBOLDT78 CUBA.
                        CHAPTER II.
                      PHYSICAL ASPECT.
       Figure of the island but lately known—Area according toLindeneau
         and Ferrer—According to Sauza—According to u Cuadro Estfr-
         diatico”—Comparative area—Length and width—Importance of
         Batabano—Comparative territorial power—Geological character
         —Mountains—Face of the country—Elevation—Noted hills—
       , Eastern portion—Gold-washing—Formation of western and cen-
       tral portion—Guinea—Soil—Hills of San Juan—Caverns—Modern
       formation—Shore at Havana—Roaring banks explained—Relative
       . age of strata—Fresh water on the cays—Origin—Vicinity of
       Havana — Guanabacoa — Serpentine — Petroleum — Botany of
       Guanabacoa—Mineral springs—Reflections on geology — Earth-
       quakes—Fertile lands—Beauty of vegetation—Soils, how distin-
       guished—Rivers—Springs—Lauds uear Havana. [Note.—Imper-
       fect state of geological knowledge in Cuba—Known metal and
       mineral productions—Coal analyzed—Celebrated mineral springs
       —Analysis of tobacco lands in the Vuelta de Abajo.]
         As the shores of the island of Cuba are covered
       with cays and reefs through more than two-tliirds
       of their extent, and the navigable channels lie out-
       side of these obstructions, the true figure of the
       island was for a long time unknown. Its width,
                                                          PHYSICAL ASPECT.
125
   particularly between Havana and Batabano, has
   been exaggerated, and it is only since the Hydro-
   graphic bureau at Madrid, the best establishment of
   its kind in Europe, has published the labors of Capt.
   Jose del Bio and Lieut. Ventura Barcaiztegui, that
   its area has been calculated with any degree of
   accuracy. The figure of the Isle of Pines, and of
   the southern coast between the port of Casilda and
   Cape Cruz (inside of the Doce leguas cays), has been
   laid down very differently in our several maps.
     Lindeneau, in view of the publications of the Bureau
   previous to 1807, had stated the area of Cuba, without
   the neighboring small islands, to be 2,255 square
   geographical leagues (fifteen to a degree), and 2,318
   with the islands that surround it, which is equivalent
   to 4,102 square maritime leagues of twenty to the
   degree. Senor Ferrer, with somewhat different data,
   does not make it exceed 3,848 square maritime
   leagues.
     In order to give in this work the most exact results
   possible in the present state of astronomical observa-
   tions there, I have induced.Senor Bauza, who honors
   me with his friendship, and whose name has be-
   come celebrated through his great and valuable
   labors, to calculate the area in accordance with the
   new map of the island on four sheets, which he will
   soon complete. This learned geographer has acced-
126
humboldt’s cuba.
           ed to my request, and found (in June, 1825), the
           superficial area of Cuba, without the Isle of Pines,
           to be 3,520 square maritime leagues, and 3,618 with
           that island.1
              By this calculation, which has been twice made,
           it appears that the Island of Cuba is one-seventh
           smaller than has been hitherto supposed; that it is
           one-third larger than St. Domingo, and only one-
           eighth smaller than England exclusive of Wales. If
           the entire archipelago of the Antilles possesses an
           area equal to one-half that of Spain, Cuba alone
           nearly equals in superficial extent all the other Greater
           and Lesser Antilles together. Its greatest length
           from Cape San Antonio to Cape Maysi (on a line
           running from W. S. W. to E. N*. E., and then from
           W. N.W. toE. S. E., through the island,) is227 leagues.
           Its greatest width, from Maternillo point to the mouth
           of the river Magdalena, near Tarquino peak (from
              1 The official “Cuadro Estadistico ” of 1846 states the area aa
           follows:
                    Cuba............................. 34,233 square ml es.
                    Isle of Pines....................   810       “  “
                    Small islands adjacent ........... 970        M  “
                                                     80,018 Bquare miles.
           Which exceeds Seilor Banzai calculation for Cuba by 2,553 square
           miles, and is five, times greater than Massachusetts, aud more than
           one-half the area of all the New England states.
                                                          PHYSICAL ASPECT.
127
 N. to S.), is 37 leagues. The mean width of the
island between Havana and Puerto Principe, being
about four-fifths of its length, is 15 leagues.
   In the most cultivated part, between Havana and
Batabano, the island is only 8} leagues across. This
proximity of the northern and southern shores at
this point makes the port of Batabano of great im-
portance both for commerce and for military defence.
Among the great islands of the globe, that of Java,
from its shape and area (4,170 square leagues), most
resembles Cuba. The coast-line of Cuba extends
520 leagues, of which 280 correspond to the southern
shore between Cape San Antonio and Ca^e Maysi.1
   That the territorial power of Cuba, as comparing
with the rest of the Antilles, may be better seen, we
present the following table:—
        Extent in sq,          Population. Pop. to sq, 
          leagues.                           league.   
Cuba according to Bauza, 3,615     715,000     197     
Haiti “ Lindeneau,       2,450     820,000     334     
Jamaica,                  460      402,000 Oo          
Puerto Rico,              322      225,000     691     
Great Antilles,          6,847   2,147,000     313     
Lesser Antilles,          940      G9G.000     740     
Whole Archipelago,       7,787   2,843.000     365     
   1 The “ Cuadro Estadistico ” of 1846 states the Bhore-line at
573 l&gues, of which 301 correspond to the south, and 272 to the.
nortli ooast.
128
humboldt’s Cuba.
 'tv
)
   More than four-fifths of the land of Cuba is low
and its surface covered witli secondary and tertiary
formations, through which granitic-gneis, syenite,
and euphotide rocks have protruded.                             V
   At present we have no very exact idea of the
geognostic character of the country, nor of the rela-
tive age or nature of its soils. We only know that
the highest group of mountains is in the extreme
southeastern portion of the island, between Cape
Cruz, Cape Maysi and Holguin. The ridge known
as the Sierra del Cobre, situate northwest of the
city of St. Jago de Cuba, is said to be more than
7,600 feet high.1 According to this supposition, the
hills of this ridge are higher than the Blue Moun-
tains of Jamaica, and the peaks of Banquillo, and
Banaste of St. Domingo. The Sierra de Tmqumo,
fifty miles west of the city of St. Jago, belongs to the
same group with the Sierra del Cobre.
   A chain of lulls runs through the island from
E.S.E. to N.N.W., approaching the southern coast
                                                                                   !
   1 The Sierra del Cobre \$ supposed by some travellers to be visible
from the shore of Jamaica, but most probably it is from the north-
ern slope of the Blue Mountains. In the first case, its height would
exceed ten thousand feet, supposing a refraction of one-twelfth
Certain it is, that the mountains of Jamaica are visible from the
summit of the hills of Tarquino.—* .PafriMa Americana, Vol. ii.
p. 282.—H,
 f- r
 r-
                               PHYSICAL ASPECT.                    129
           between Puerto Principe and Trinidad; while more
           to the west, toward Alvarez and Matanzas, the
           sierras of Gavilan,- Cavnarioca, and Madruga ap-
           proach the northern shore. While travelling from
           the mouth of the river Guaurabo to Trinidad, I saw
           the hills of San Juan, which form peaks more than
           1,900 feet high, whose slopes incline with great regu-
           larity to the south. This calcareous group is seen very
           clearly from Cay de Piedras. The coasts of Jagua
           and Batabano are very low, and I believe there is no
           hill exceeding 1,275 feet in height, except the Pan of
           Guajaibon, west of the meridian of Matanzas.
             The face of the interior of the island is gently
           undulating, like that of England, and is not more
           than 280 to 380 feet above the level of the sea.1
           Hie objects seen at the greatest distance, and best
           known to navigators, are the “ Pan of Matanzas,”5
           which is a truncated cone like a small monument in
           shape; the “ Arcos de Canasi,” which are seen
           between Puerto Escondido and Jaruco, like small
           segments of a circle; the “Table land of Mariel,”
             ‘The village of Ubajay, about fifteen miles distant from Havana,
           S. 25° W., is 242 feet above the sea. The summit line of 13cjucalr at
           the Taverna del Ucy, is 305.7 feet.—II.
             * 1,255 feet high. At sea I have found the “Arcos de Canasi” to
           be 732 feet high.*—H.

6*
130
                         HUMBOEDT'S CUBA.
         the “Maiden’s Paps,” and the “Pan de Guajaibon.”1
         This level of the limestone formation of Cuba,
         declining toward the northwest, indicates the sub-,
         marine union of these rocks with the similar low
         lands of the Bahama Islands, Florida, and Yuca-
         tan.
           As observation has been limited to Havana and
         its immediate neighborhood, wo should not be sur-
         prised at tbe profound ignorance displayed in
         relation to the geognosy of the Sierra del Cobre.
         Don Francisco Ramirez, a traveller, who had been a
         pupil of Proust, and was well versed in the chemical
         and mineralogical sciences, informed mo that the
         western part of the island is granitic, and that he
         had found there gneiss and primitive slate. From
         these granitic formations have probably arisen the
         alluvial sands mixed with gold which were worked
         with so much zeal during the early years of the
         copquest, to the great misfortune of the natives, and
         vestiges of them are still found in the rivers of
         Holguty and Escatnbray; these alluvial sands are
         found generally in the vicinity of Villa Clara, Santi
         Espiritu, Puerto Principe, Bayamo, and the Bay of
           1 2484 feet high. Farther west, on the northern coa&t, we have the
         “ Sierra de los Organon,” and “ Sierra de Rosario,” and on the southern
         coast, the " Sierra de Rio Puerco.”—H.
                      PHYSICAL ASPECT.              131
    Nipe.1 Perhaps the abundance of copper spoken of
    by the     oonquistadores of the sixteenth century, at
    which time the Spaniards observed the natural
    productions of America better than they did in
    subsequent ages, is due to the formations of horn-
    blende slate, and slate do           ,  mixed  with
    diorite and euphotide rocks analogous to those I
    found in the hills at Guanabacoa.
      The central and .western parts of the island contain
    two formations of compact limestone; one with
    sandy clay, and the other with gypsum. The first
    of these presents (I will not say from its relative
    age, or its superposition, which I do not know, but
    from its composition and appearance) some similarity
    with the formation of the Jura. It is white or of a
    light yellow ochre color, brittle, sometimes conchoidal
       'This supposition of ancient riches is not unlikely, and if we
     wonder at the small product of the gold washings in our days in
     Cuba and St. Domingo, at the same places where, in former times,
     considerable sums were found, we should remember that in Brazil,
     the yield of the gold washings has fallen from (5,600 kilogrammes
     to less than 595, between the years 1760 and 1820. The lumps of
     gold, several pounds in weight, which have been found in our days,
     in Florida and the two Carolinas, demonstrate the primitive richness
     of the entire valley of the Antilles, between the island of Cuba and
     the Appalachian chain ; but it is natural that the yield of the gold
     washings should diminish with much greater rapidity than that of the
     working of subterraneous veins.—II,
132
                             iiumboldt’s cuua..
      and sometimes smooth, and lies in very thin layers
    with nodules of pyrogeneous silex, often hollow
    (Iiio Canimar, two leagues east of Matanzasj, and
    ' petrifications of pecten, cardites, terrebratules, and
    madrepores, which are not so much dispersed
    through the mass as gathered in banks. I found no
    layers of petrified oolites, but thero were porous and
    almost hollow strata, between the potrero of Count
    de Mopox and the port of Batabano, similar to the
    spongy strata presented by the jurassic limestone at
    Franconia, near Dondorf, Pegnitz, and Turnback-
    Yellow cavernous strata, with holes, from three to
    four inches diameter, alternate with others, entirely
    compact and less abundant in petrifactions.1
        The chain of hills which bounds the valley of
      Giiines upon the north, uniting with the hills of
      Camoa and the “ Tetas de Managua,” appertain to the
      second variety, which is of a reddish white color,'
      and almost lithographic, like the jurassic limestone at
      Papenheim. The compact and the cavernous strata
      contain brown, ochreous veins of iron, and perhaps
      the red soil so esteemed by the coffee planters, arises
      from the decomposition 'of some of these superficial *
        *A8 the western portion of the island has no deep fissures, this •
      alternation is observed while travelling from Havana to Batabano; .
      the deeper strata crop out with an inclination of 30° to 40° N.E, as
      one advances.—H.
                                                         PHYSICAL ASPECT.
133
    layers of oxidized iron, mixed with silica and clay?
    or with a red sandy marl lying tipon the limestone.1
    All this formation I shall call Giiiues limestone, to
    distinguish it from another much more modern for-
    mation in the hills of San Juan, near Trinidad; whose
    peaks remind mo of the limestone mountains of
    Caripe, in the vicinity of Cumana. It contains also
    great caverns near Matanzas and Jaruco. I have not
    learned that any fossil bones have been found in
    them. This frequency of caverns, in which the
    rains accumulate and the brooks disappear, some-
    times causes great disasters.3 I believe the gypsum
    of Cuba is not found in the tertiary, hut in the
    secondary formations. It is worked in many places
    east of Matanzas, at*San Antonio de los Banos,
    where it contains sulphur, and in the cays off San
    Juan de los Kemedios.
      We should not confound with this Giiines (Jurassic)
    limestone, sometimes porous and sometimes compact,
    another formation, so modern, that we may believe
    it still grows in our own time. I speak of the conglo-
    merate limestone which I have observed in the cays
    or small islands lining the coast between Batabano
    and the Bay of Jagua, south of the Zapata swamp,
      1 Sand and iron-sand.—IT.
      3 As in the case of the ruin of the old tobacco mills of the royal
    monopoly.—JI.
134
humboldt’s cuba.
      principally on Cay Bonito, Cay Flamenco, and Cay
      de Piedras. By the soundings, we know that these
      are rocks rising precipitously twenty or thirty
      fathoms from the bottom. Some are level with the ■
      sea. and others rise from one and a half to two feet
      above the surface. Sharp fragments of white coral
      and shells (cellularia), two or three cubic inches in
      size and cemented with grains of quartz-sand, are
      there found. All the inequalities of these rocks are
      covered with made earth, in which, with a lens, we
      can distinguish nothing but detritus of shells and
      coral. This tertiary formation corresponds, without
      a doubt, to that of the coasts of Cumana, Carthagena,
      and the Gran Terre de la Guadalupe, of which I
      have spoken in my geognostic view of South America.
         Messieurs Chamisso and Guaimard have lately
      thrown much light upon the formation of the coral
      islands of the southern seas. While we see at
      Havana, at. the foot of the Pnnta fort, upon the
      shore of cavernous rocks,1 covered with verdant
        1 The surface of these shores, blackened and worn by the waved,
      presents conical ramifications such as are found in lava currents.
      The change of color caused by the waters is the effect of manganese,
      the presence of which is known from the detritus. As the sea enters
      the fissures of the rock and a cavern at the base of the Morro Castle,
      it compresses the air and forces it out with an extraordinary noise,
      which explains the phenomenon of the roaring banks so well known
                                                         PHYSICAL ASPECT.
135
   ubcs and living polipfers, large masses of madrepore,
   and other lithophite corals, enclosed in the texture
   of the rock, there is reason to admit that all this
   limestone rock of which the island of Cuba is in
   great part composed, is the effect of an uninterrupt-
   ed operation of nature through the action of organic
   productive forces and partial destruction, and which
   continues in our time in the bosom of the ocean.
   But this appearance of recent formation soon disap-
   pears, when we leave the shore, or when we remem-
   ber the series of coral rocks which the formations of
   different epochs enclose, the muschelkalk, the lime-
   stone of the Jura, and the calcaire grossier of Paris.
     The same coral rocks of the Punta castle are found
   in the highest mountains in the interior of the coun-
   try, accompanied by petrifactions of bivalve shells,
   very different from those which at present exist on
   the shores of the Antilles. Without wishing to
   assign with certainty to the limestone formation of
   Giiines a determinate place in the scale of forma-
   tions, I entertain no doubt as to the relative antiquity
   of this rock with the conglomerate limestone of the
   cays, situate south of Batabano, and east of the Isle
   of Pines. The globe has experienced great revolu-
   tions between the epochs of these two formations,
   to navigators between Jamaica and San Juan do Nicaragua, and
   near the Island of St. Andrew.—g.
136
humboldt’s cub,y.
      one of which contains the great caverns of Matanzas
     and the other is daily augmented by the accumula-
     tion of fragments of coral and quartz sand. The
     latter of these formations seems to rest on the south
     part of Cuba, sometimes on the Guinea (jurassic)
     limestone, as in the Jardinillos, and at others (toward
     Cape Cruz) immediately upon the primitive rock.
     In the Lesser Antilles the coral has covered the
     volcanic products.
        Many of the cays of Cuba contain fresh water, and
     I have found excellent water in the centre of Cay de
     Piedras. When we remember how extremely small
     these islands are, we can hardly believe that those
     ponds of fresh water are rain water that has not
     evaporated. Perhaps they arise from a submarine
     communication between the limestone formation of
     the shore, and that which has served as a base for
     the collection of the lithophites: so that the fresh
     water of Cuba rises by hydrostatic pressure through
     the coral rock of the cays, as is the case in the bay
     of Jagua, where Tountains spring forth in the salt
     water, and are the resort of the Manati.
        East of Havana the secondary formations are
     traversed by Syenite and Euphotide rocks, grouped
     in a singular manner. The southern side of the bay,
     ns well ns the northern (the hills of the Morro and
     Cabana), are of jurassic limestone; but on the east-
                                                   PHYSICAL A8PKCT.
  137
 ern side of tlio two arms—Guanabacoa and Guasa-
bacoa, the entire formation is de transition. Pass-
ing southward, we find syenite near Marimelena,
composed in a large degree of hornblende, and in part
decomposed with a little quartz, and a reddish white
feldspar, which is sometimes crystallized. This beau-
tiful syenite, whose masses incline to the northwest,
alternates twice with serpentine, and the intercalated
strata of this stone is seventeen or eighteen feet thick.
   Further south toward Regia and Guanabacoa,
there is no syenite, and the entire surface is covered
with serpentine, in hills from 200 to 250 feet high,
running from east to west. This rock is much
fissured, its exterior being of a bluish brown color,
covered with detritus of manganese, and the interior
of leek or asparagus green traversed by small veins
of asbestos. It contains neither granite nor horn-
blende, but metallized diallage is disseminated through
the mass. The serpentine breaks sometimes in leaves,
sometimes in scales, and this was the first instance
of my finding metallized diallage within the tropics.
Many of the pieces of serpentine have magnetic
poles, and others have a texture so homogeneous,
and so firm a polish, that from a distance they may
be mistaken for pitchstone, (pechstein). It is desi-
rable that these beautiful masses should be used in
the arts as is done in many places in Germany.
 138                 iiumboldt’s  Cuba.
   Approaching Guanabacoa, the serpentine is found
traversed by veins twelve or fourteen inches thick,
filled with fibrous quartz, amethyst, and rich mam-
milated stalactiform chalcedony; perhaps chryso-
prase will some day he found with them. Among
these veins some copperisli pyrites appear, which
are said to he mixed with an argentiferous grey
copper ore. I found no vestiges of this grey copper
. ore, and it is probably metallized diallage, which,
for ages have given the hills of Guanabacoa the
reputation of containing much gold and silver.
Petroleum exudes in some places through the
fissures in the serpentine.1 Springs are frequent
    1 Are there in the bay of Havana other petroleum springs than
   those of Guanabacoa, or should we suppose that the liquid betun,
   used by Sebastian Ocampo, in 1508, when he careened his vessels
   here, have become dry? It was this that attracted the attention of
   Ocampo to the port of Havana, when he gave it the name of
   “Puerto de Carenas.” It is said that abundant petroleum springs
   have been found in the eastern part of the island, between Holguin
   and Mayari, and on the shores of St. Jago de Cuba. A small island,
   Siguapa, has recently been found, near Point Hicacos, which
   presents to the eye solid, terreous petroleum only ; this mass recalls
   to the mind the asphaltum of Yalorbc, in the limestone of the Jura.
   Does the serpentine formation of the Guanabacoa recur in the Ruby
   hill, near Bahia Honda? The hills of Regia aud Guanabacoa
   present to the botanist, at the feet of royal palms, Xatvofa
   panduraefolia; X. integerrima Jacq; X. fragrans; Pctivcria
   alliacia; Pisonia loranthoidcs ■, Lantana involucrata; Rusaelia
                                                       PHYSICAL ASPECT.
139
 there, the water of which contains a little snlphuret-
ed hydrogen and deposits oxide of iron. The baths
of Bareto are very agreeable, but their temperature
is very nearly that of the atmosphere. The geognos-
tic constitution of that group of serpentine is worthy
of particular attention from its isolation, its veins,
its connection with the syenite, and its elevation
through formations filled with petrified shells.
   A feldspar, with base of soda (compact feldspar),
forms, with diallage, the euphotide and serpentine
rocks; with hypersthene it forms hypersthenite; with
hornblende, diorite; with augite, dolerite and basalt;
and with granite, eclogite. These .five rocks dis-
persed throughout the globe, charged with oxidized
iron and mixed with sphene, have in all probability
a similar origin. In the euphotides two formations
are easily distinguishable; one wanting hornblende,
even when it alternates with hornblende rocks (Joria
in Piedmont, Regia in Cuba), and abounding in pure
serpentine, metallized diallage, aud sometimes jasper
(Tuscany, Saxony); aud the other heavily charged
 sarmentosa; Ehrctia havanensis; Cordia globosa; Convolvulus
pinnatifidus; C. calycinus; Bignonia lcpidota; Lagascea mollis
Car.; Malpighia cubeusis; Trioptcris lucida; Zantlioxylum ; Pte-
rota; Myrtus tuberculata; Mariscus havanensis; Audropogon ave-
naccus Schrad.; Olyra latifolia; Chloris cruciata; and a large
Lumber of Banisteria, whose gilded flowers adorn the scene.—See
our Florvla Cuba insula, in the Nov. Genera Spec.—II.
140
                           Humboldt’s cuba.
     with hornblende often giving way to diorite, without
    jasper, in layers, and sometimes containing rich
    veins of copper (Silesia, Mussinet in Piedmont, Pyre-
    nees, Parapara in Venezuela, Copper mountains of
    Western America). This last-named formation of
    the euphotides is that which, from its mixture with
    diorite, blends with hypersthenite, in which, in Scot-
    land and Norway, strata of true serpentine is some-
    times found. No volcanic rocks of a more recent
    epoch, as, for example, trachytes, solerite, and basalt,
    have been discovered in the island of Cuba; and I
    am not aware if there are any in the other Great
    Antilles, whose geognostic constitution differs essen-
    tially from that of the series of limestone and volcanic
    islands, that extends from the island of Trinidad to
    the Virgin Isles.
       Earthquakes are much less disastrous in Cuba
    than in Puerto Pico and Haiti, and are experienced
    most in the eastern part between Cape Maysi, St.
    Jago de Cuba, and Puerto Principe. Perhaps there
    extends toward those regions some lateral action
    from the great fissure which is believed to extend
    across the granitic tongue of land between Port an
    Prince and CapeTiburon (in St. Domingo), in which
    entire mountains were sunk in 1770.1 The cavern-
      1 Dupuget, in the “ Diario de Minas,” vol. I. p. 58, and Leopold de
    Bucb, Thy. Bcschr dor Canar. Inseln., 1825, p. 403.—H.
                                                       PHYSICAL ASPECT.
141
 ous texture of the limestone formations which I have
just described, the great inclination of its strata, the
small width of the island, the frequent absence of
trees in the plains, and the proximity of the moun
tains, where they form an elevated chain near the
southern coast, may be considered as the principal
causes of the want of rivers, and of the absence of
moisture which are experienced, particularly in the
western part of Cuba. In this respect Haiti, Jamaica,
and many other of the Lesser Antilles which have
volcanic peaks covered with woods, are much more
gifted by nature.
   The lands most celebrated for their fertility are
those of the districts of Jagua, Trinidad, and Mari el.
The valley of Giiines owes its reputation in this
respect entirely to its artificial irrigation by means
of canals. Notwithstanding the absence of deep
rivers and the unequal fertility of the soil, the island
of Cuba presents on every hand a most varied and
agreeable country from its undulating character, its
ever-springing verdure, and the variety of its vegeta-
ble formations. Two kinds of trees with large flexible
and shining leaves, five species of palms (the Royal
palm, or Oreodoxia regia, the Coco comun, the Coco
crispa, the Coripha miraguama, and the C. mari-
tima), and small bushes, ever laden with flowers,
adorn the hills and vale3. The Cecropia peltata
142
 humboldt’s cuba.
 marks the humid places, and we might believe that
the entire island was originally a forest of palms
and wild lime, and orange trees. These last, which
have a small fruit, are probably anterior to the
arrival of the Europeans,1 who carried there the
agmmi of the gardens, which rarely exceed ten or
fifteen feet in height.
  The lime and the orange do not usually grow
together, and when the new settlers clear the land
they distinguish the quality of the soil according as
it bears one or other of these social plants; and the
soil that bears the orange is preferred to that which
produces the small lime. In a country where the
operations of the sugar plantations have not been so
well perfected that they need no other fuel than the
lagass, this progressive destruction of the small
clumps of wood is a real calamity. The arid nature
of the soil is increased in proportion as it is stripped
of the trees which serve to shield'it from the hot rays
of the sun, and whose leaves radiating their caloric
  1 The well-informed inhabitants state, with pride, that the culti-
vated orange brought from Asia preserves its size and all the pro-
perties of its fruit when it becomes wild. (This also is the opinion
of Senor Gallesio.—“ Traite du Citrus,” p. 32). The Brazilians do
not doubt that the small bitter orange, which bears the name of
naranjo do terra, and is found wild far from the habitations, is of
American origin.—Caldcleugh’s Travels South vol. I.
 p. 25— H.
                                                        PHYSICAL ASPECT.
143
 against an ever clear sky, cause a precipitation of the
watery vapor from tke cooled.air.
   Among the few rivers worthy of notice, we may cite
that of Giiines, the waters of which it was intended, in
1798, to turn into the canal for light draught naviga-
tion, that was to have crossed the island under the
meridian of Batabano; the Almendares or Chorrera,
whose waters are carried to Havana by the zanja de
Antonelli / the Cauto, north of the city of Bayamo;
the Maximo, which rises east of Puerto Principe;
the Sagua la Grande, near Villa Clara; the Palmas,
which empties into the sea opposite to Cay Galindo;
the smaller rivers of Jaruco and Santa Cruz, between
Guanabo and Matanzas, which are navigable for some
miles from their months, and facilitate the embarca-
tion of sugar; the San Antonio, which, like many
others, disappears in the caverns of the limestone
rock; the Guaurabo, west of the port of Trinidad;
and the Galafre, in the fertile Filipinas district,
emptying into the Bay of Cortes.
   The southern side of the island is most abundant in
springs, where, from Jagua to Point Sabina, a dis-
tance of forty-six leagues, the country is a continuous
swamp. The abundance of water that filtrates
through the fissures of the stratified rock is so great,
that from the hydrostatic pressure, springs are found
in the sea at some distance from the coast.
  144              humboldt’s ccisa.
   Tlie lands in the district of Havana are not the
  most fertile, and the few sugar plantations that were
  near the capital have been turned into grazing farms,
  and fields of corn and forage, the demand for the
  city making them very profitable. Agriculturists ia
  Cuba recognize two classes of land which are often
  found intermixed like the squares of a chess-board;
  the black or brown soil, which is argillaceous, and
  highly charged with sooty exhalations, and the red
  land, which is a strong soil and mixed with oxide of
  iron. Although the black land is generally preferred
  for the cultivation of the sugar cane, because it pre-
  serves its moisture better, and the red land for the
  coffee tree, yet many sugar plantations have been
  made in the red lands.
     [Note. The geology of Cuba is still very imper-
   fectly known, no systematic examination of its sur-
   face having been made, and the board appointed to
   compile the “Cuadro Estadistico” of 1846 stated,
   that in regard to this portion of their labors they
   could do little more than reproduce the remarks
   accompanying the “ Cuadro ” of 1827. Besides the
   observations of Baron Humboldt, Don Francisco
   Bamirez, and Don Bamon de la Sagra have been
   the principal scientific writers on this subject; the
   former having travelled through a portion of the east-
                                                             PHYSICAL. ASPECT.
145
 ern department, early in the present century, and
the latter having resided several years previous to
1833, at Havana, where he was director of the
Botanic Garden. From these sources we. obtain the
following information in relation to its mineral
resources.
   Gold.—During the earlier years of settlement gold
washings and mines were worked by native Indians,
and Pedro Martir de Angleria, one of the most learn-
ed of the early historians of America, states that
Cuba was more rich in gold than St. Domingo. The
knowledge of the mines has been lost, though one is
said to exist near Trinidad; but small quantities of
gold are still washed out from the sands of the rivers
Damuji and Caonao, emptying into the bay of Jagua,
the Sagua la Grande and Agabama, near the Escam-
bray hills, the Saramaguacan, running into the bay
of Nuevitas, and brooks in the vicinity of Holguin,
Bayamo and Fipe. It is said to have been found
formerly near San Juan de los Remedios.
   Silver has been found in combination with copper
near Villa Clara, yielding seven and a half ounces to
the hundred pounds of ore.
   Quicksilver is said to have been extracted in
former times from the arid savannas of the Copey
hacienda, near San Juan de los Remedios.
   Copper abounds through a great part of the island,
                         7
146
 Humboldt’s Cuba.
 and more -than one hundred mines have been enter-
ed, in accordance with the' law, at the Treasury de-
partment, though but few of them are worked at
present. The ore9 of those near St. Jago de Cuba
have yielded at one timo seventy-five per cent, of
copper.
       Iron has been found in several places, among
which are Nueva Filipina, Bahia Honda, Jaruco,
Villa Clara, Santi Espiritu, Holguin, St. Jago de
Cuba, and Baracoa. An analysis of a vein near St.
Jago de Cuba yielded twenty-six per cent, of metal.
     Plumbago, is found in combination with iron, near
   St. Jago de Cuba.
     Copperas is also found in the same vicinity.
         Antimony, with_ Lead, is said to exist near Hol-
   guin.
     Tala and Anvianthus exist in the vicinity of Trini-
   dad, Ilolguiu, and Santi Espiritu.
     Ochre is found at Manzanillo, St. Jago de Cuba,
   Santa Maria del Rosario, and Guanabacoa.
     Chrome.—Deposits of this pigment have been
   worked near Holguin.
     Chalk exists at Manzanillo, and near Moron.
   Gh'indstone and Whetstone, in great varieties, are
   found at Nueva Filipina, and in many places in the
   eastern part of tlie island.
                          Coal has been often sought, but hitherto without
                                                        PHYSICAL ASPECT.
147
 success. Veins of solidified asphaltum (betun) exist in
many places. Several analyses have been made of
this substance; that of G-uanabacoa, near Havana,
 giving—
         Volatile matter........................ 63
         Carbon.......................;......... 35
         Ashes and residuum.  ................... 2
                                                100
 It burns with great fiame and smoke, but cakes
very much, and leaves a light, bulky coke. Its spe-
cific gravity is 1.14. Specimens from the, veins near
Guanabo were analyzed by Senor Sagra, in 1828,
giving—
       Volatile matter......................    28
       Carbon................................   CO
       Ashes and residuum..................... 12
                                                                                 100
        Specific gravity, 1.18.
   Marble is found in great abundance in many
places.
   Loadstone exists also in large quantities.
   Moulding sand, of fine quality, abounds in Nueva
Filipina.
   Mineral springs are found in many parts of the
island, some of which have great renown among the
inhabitants for their sanative properties. The most
celebrated are the following:
  148               iiumboldt’s cuba.
       Sm Diego, forty leagues S.W. from Havana. The
  water of the two springs, Tigre and             comes
  from the earth with a temperature of 95° Far. Their
analysis by Senor Esteves gave to one pound of
water, 0.46 grains sulphureted hydrogen, 10.5 sul-
phate of lime, 1. hydrochlorate of magnesia, and
* 1. carbonate of magnesia.
         Mad/ruga, fifteen leagues S.E. from Havana. The
  water is of lower temperature than that of San Diego,
  but similar in its qualities.
  .      Gumabacoa, one league from Havana. There are
  several springs here: that of Ta/rraco being similar
  to the waters of Madrnga; Bano de la              , of
  like qualities, but more highly charged with sul-
  pliureted hydrogen; the water of the Amber well
  {de       sucoino), so called from its amber taste and odor,
    is esteemed as a stomachic tonic; the baths of -
    veto,          Espanol, Gassmova, &c., are highly recom-
    mended. Ho analysis has been made of these waters,
    but they are all more or less charged with magnesia,.
    nitre, and oxide of iron.
            Mayajigua, nineteen leagues from San Juan de los
    Remedios. The water of this spring has a very great
    local reputation. It presents the phenomenon of
    being about fifteen degrees wanner in the morning
    and evening than at other hours.
       Guadalupe, sixteen leagues from Santi Espirituj
                                                         PHYSICAL ASPECT.
149
   not analyzed, but similar to the waters of Gruana-
   bacoa.
     Gamujiro, two and a half leagues from Puerto
   Principe. The water is highly charged with iron,
   and bcin^ very tonic, is highly esteemed.
     The waters of several streams in Cuba are reputed
   to possess mineral qualities, and to produce medi-.
   cinal effects upon bathers.
     We close this imperfect view of the geology and
   mineral resources of Cuba with the following analysis
   of some of the celebrated Tobacco lands, as given by
   Don Ramon do la Sagra.
     San Diego de los Banos, two localities:—
Organic matter____     ............ 18.40         23.20 
Silica.............    ............. 70.80        G8.20 
Lime ...........       ................ 0.40       4.60 
Alumina ........       ................ 0.40  vestiges. 
Oxide of iron.......   ................ 10.00      4.00 
                                       100.00    100.00 
Vuelta de Abajo,       two localities:                  
Organic matter.....    .............. 9.G0         4.60 
' Silica.............. ............. 86.40        90.80 
Lime..............     ....... 0.00           vestiges. 
Alumina ..........     . ... 0.68                  3.40 
Oxide of iron......    ..... 1.92                  1.20 
150
humboldt’s cuba.
                     CHAPTER III. #
                                   CLIMATE.
    General remarks—Mean temperature—Means of heat and cold—
     Summer solstice—Peculiarities of winter—Compared with Macao
     and Rio Janeiro—Fires not needed—Hail-General remarks
     —Anomalies of vegetation—The pine of Cuba—Identity with that
     of Mexico—Temperature in the interior and at Havana—Compari-
     son with Cumanri—Ice—Snow never seen in Cuba—Sudden changes
     at Havana—Internal heat of the earth—Oscillations of thermome-
     ter and barometer connected—Barometrical altitudes—Hurricanes. v
     —[Note.—Hurricanes of 1844 and 1845—Rain gauge and Hygro-
     meter—Atmospherical phenomena—Cloudy and fair days—Effect
     of climate on vegetation.]
     The climate of Havana is that which corresponds
    to the extreme limit of the torrid zone; it is a tropical
    climate, in which the unequal distribution of heat
    through the various seasons of the year presages the
    transition to the climates of the temperate zone.
     Calcutta (N. lat. 22° 31'), Canton (N. lat. 23° 8'),
    Macao (1ST. lat. 22° 12'), Havana (N. lat. 23° 9'), and
    Rio Janeiro (S. lat. 22° 54'), are places whose
    location at the level of the ocean and near the
    tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, being equi-dis-
                                                                  CLIMATE.
151
 taut from tlie equator, makes them of tlie greatest
importance in the study of meteorology. This science
can advance only by the determination of certain
numerical elements,which are the indispensable
basis of the laws we wish to discover. As the
appearance of vegetation on the confines of the
torrid zone and under the equator is the same, we
are accustomed vaguely to confound the climates of
the zones comprised between the 0° and 10°, and 15°
and 23° of latitude. The region of the palm, the
banana, and the arborescent grasses, extends far
beyond the tropics, but we should err in applying
tlie result of our observations on the limit of the
torrid zone, to the phenomena we may observe
in tho plains under the equator.
    It is important to establish first, in order to correct
these errors, the means of temperature for the year
and the months, as also the oscillations of tlie
thermometer at different stations under the parallel
of Havana; and by an exact comparison with other
places equally distant from the equator, Rio Janeiro
and Macao, for example, to demonstrate that the
great decline of temperature which has been observed
in Cuba, is owing to the descent and irruption of the
masses of cold air which flow from the temperate
zones toward the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn.
    The mean temperature of Havana, as shown by
    152              humboldt’s cuba.
    excellent observations made through four years, is
    25°.7 centigrade (78°.25 Fahrenheit), being only 2°
    C. (3°.6 F.) lower than that of the regions of
    America under the equator. The proximity of the
    sea increases the mean temperature of the coasts, but
    in the interior of the island, where the northern
    winds penetrate with equal force, and where the
    land has the slight elevation of 250 feet, the mean
    temperature does not exceed 23° C. (73°.4 F.), which
    is not greater than that of Cairo and all Lower Egypt*
      The difference between the mean temperature of
    the hottest month and that of the coldest is 12° 0*
    (21°.6 F.) in Havana, and 8° C. (14°.4 F.) in the
    interior, while at Cumana, it is barely 3° C. (5°.4
    F.) July and August, which are the hottest
    months attain in Cuba a mean temperature of 28°.8
    C. (83°.8 F.), and perhaps even 29°.5 C. (85°. 1 F.),
    as under the equator.
      The coldest months are December and January;
    their mean temperature is 17° C. (62°.6 F.) in the
    interior of the island, and 21° C. (69°.8 F.), in
    Havana, that is, from 5° C. to 8° C. (9° F.), (14°i
    F.) less than during the same months under the
    equator, but yet 3° C. (5°.4 F.) higher than that of the
    hottest month in Paris.
      As regards the extremes touched by the centigrade
    thermometer in the shade, the same fact is observed
                                                                   CLIMATE.
153
          near the limits of the torrid zone that characterizes
the regions nearer the equator (between 0° and 10°
of north and south latitude); a thermometer which
*)  '     had been observed in Paris at 38°.4 (101° F.), does
          not rise at Cumaua above 33° (91°.4 F.); at Yera
Cruz it has touched 32° (89°.6 F.), but once in
thirteen years. At Havana, during three years,
(1810-1812), Senor Ferrer found it to oscillate only
between 16° and 30° (61° and 86° F.). Senor
Robredo, in his manuscript notes, which I have in
my possession, cites as a notable event that the
i         temperature  in 1801 rose to 34°.4 (94° F.), while in
          Paris, according to the interesting investigations of
Mons. Arago, the extremes of temperature between
,         36°.7 and 38° (97°.9 and 100°.4 F.) have been
          reached four times iu ten years, (1793-1803.)
            The great proximity of the days on which the sun
          passes the zenith of those places situate near the
          limit of the-torrid zone, makes the heat at times
          very intense upon the coast of Cuba, and in all those
          places comprised between the parallels of 20° and
          23£0, not so much as regards entire months as for a
          term of a few days. In ordinary years the thermo-
          meter never rises in August above 28° or 30° C.
          (82°.4 or 86° F.), and I have known the inhabi.
          tants complain of excessive heat when it rose to 31°
          C. (87°.8 F.)
                               7*

         154              humboldt’s  cuba.
           It seldom happens in winter'that the temperature
         falls to 10° or 12° C. (50° to 53°.6 F.), hut when- the
         north wind prevails for several weeks, bringing the
         cold air of Canada, ice is sometimes formed at night,
         in the interior of the island, and in the plain near
         Havana. From the observations of Messrs. Wells
         and Wilson, we may suppose that this effect is
         produced by the radiation of caloric when the
         thermometer stands at 5° C. (41° F.), and even 9° C.
         (48°.2 F.) above zero. This formation of a thick ice
         very near the level of the sea, is more worthy the
         attention of naturalists from the fact, that at
         Caraccas (10° 31' N. lat.), at an elevation of 300
         feet, the temperature of the atmosphere has never
         fallen below 11° C. (41°.8 F.); and that yet nearer
         to the equator we have to ascend 8,900 feet to see ice
         form. We also observe that between Havana and
         St. Domingo, and between Batabano and Jamaica,
         there is a difference of only 4° or 5° of latitude, and
         yet, in St. Domingo, Jamaica, Martinique, and
         Guadalupe, the minimum temperature in the plains
         is from 18°.o to 20°.5 O. (65°.3 to 68D.9 F.)
           It will be interesting to compare the climate of Ha-
         vana with that of Macao and Rio de Janeiro, one simi-
         larly situated near the. northern extreme of the torrid'
         zone, but on the eastern shore of Asia, and the other
         near the southern limit of the torrid zone, on the
                                                                 CLIMATE.
155
      eastern shore of America. The means of temperature
      at Rio Janeiro arc deduced from three thousand five
      hundred observations made by Senor Benito Sanchez
      Dorta; those of Macao from twelve hundred observa-
      tions which the Abbd Richenet lias kindly sent me.
                                                 Mean.
For the year,
 “   “   hottest month,
                                           “ « coldest u
 Havana,        Macao,            Rio Janeiro,
 N. lat. 23° 9'. N. lat. 22* 12'. S. lat. 22* 64'.
 78°.26 F.     730.94 F.          740.30 F.
 83°.84 F.     83°. 12 F.         80°.9G F.
 690.98 F.     610.88 F.          68° F.
        The climate of Havana, notwithstanding the
     frequent prevalence of north and northwest winds,
     is warmer than either that of Macao or Rio
     Janeiro. The first named of these places is some-
     what cold, because of the west winds which prevail
     along the eastern shores of the great continent. The
     proximity of very broad stretches of land, covered
     with mountains and high plains, makes the distribu-
     tion of heat through the months of the year, more
     unequal at Macao and Canton, than in an island
     bordered by sea-shores upon the west, and on the
     north by the heated waters of the Gulf Stream. Thus
     it is that at Canton and Macao the winters are much •
     more severe than at Havana.
                          The mean temperatures of December, January,
                          February, and March, at Canton, in 1801, were be-
        156 .            humboldt’s cuba.
        tween 15° and 17°.3 (59° and 62° F.); at Macao,
        between 16°.6 and 20° (61°.9 and 68° F.); while at
        Havana they were generally between 21° and 24°.3
        (69°.8 and 75°.7); yet the latitude of Macao is one
        degree south of that of Havana, and the latter city
        and Canton are on the same parallel, with a differ-
        ence of one mile, a little more or less. But although
        the isothermal lines, or lines of equal heat, are
        convex toward the pole in the            of climates
        of Eastern Asia, as also in the system of climates of
        Eastern   America, the cold on the same geographical
        parallel is greater in Asia.1 The Abb6 Richenet,
        who used the excellent maximum and minimvm
        thermometer of Six, has observed it to fall even to
        3°.S and 5° (38° and 41° F.), in the nine years, from
        1806 to 1814.
          At Canton, the thermometer sometimes falls to
        0° C. (32° F.), and from the radiation of caloric, ico
        is formed on the roofs of the houses. Although
        this excessive cold never last more than one day,
        the English merchants residing at Canton light fires
          1 The difference of climate is so great on the eastern and western
        shores of the old continent, that in Canton, lat. 23°.8', the mean
        annual temperature is 22°.9 (G3°.2 F.), while at Santa Cruz dc
        Teneriffe, lat. 28°. 28', it ia 23°.8 (74P.8 F., according to Buch and
        Escolar. Canton, situate upon an eastern coast, enjoys a conti-
        nental climate. Teneriffe is an island near tho western coast of
        Africa.—H.
                                                                    CLIMATE.
157
      during the months of November, December, and
      January, while at Havana fires are never needed, /
        JIail of large size frequently falls in the Asiatic coun-
      tries round Canton and in Macao, while at Havana
      fifteen years will pass without a single fall of hail.
      In all three of these places the thermometer will some-
      times stand for hours between 0° and 4° C. (32° and
      39°.7F.); yet notwithstanding (which seems to me
      more strange), it has never been known to snow; and
      although the temperature falls so low, the banana
      and the palm grow as well in the neighborhoods of
      Canton, Macao, and Havana, as in the plains imme-
      diately under the equator.
        In the present state of the world it is an advantage
      to the study of meteorology, that we can gather so
      many numerical elements of the climates of coun-
      tries situate almost immediately under the tropics.
      The five great cities of the commercial world—Can-
      ton, Macao, Calcutta, Havana, and Rio Janeiro, are
      found in this position. Resides these, we have in the
      Northern hemisphere, Muscat, Syene, Now Santan-
      der, Durango, and the Northern Sandwich Islands;
      in the Southern hemisphere—Bourbon, Isle of France,
      and the port of Cobija, between Copiapo and Arica,
      places much frequented by Europeans, and which
      present to the naturalist the same advantages of
      position as Rio Janeiro and Havana.
         158               humboldt’s cuba.
           Climatology advances slowly, because we gather
         by chance the results obtained at points of the globe
         where the civilization of man is just beginning its
         development. These points form small groups, sepa-
         rated from each other by immense Bpaces of lauds
         unknown to the meteorologist. In order to attain a
         knowledge of the laws of nature regulating the dis-
         tribution of heat in the world, we must give to
         observation a direction in conformity with the needs
         of a nascent science, and ascertain its most impor-
         tant numerical data. New Santander, upon tho
         eastern coast of the Gulf of Mexico, probably has a
         mean temperature lower than that of the Island of
         Cuba, for the atmosphere there must participate,
         during the cold of winter, in the effects of the great
         continent extending towards the northwest.
           On the other hand, if we leave the system of cli-
         mates of Western America, if we pass the lake, or,
         more strictly speaking, the submerged valley of tho
         Atlantic, and fix our attention upon the coasts of
         Africa, we find that in the cis-Atlmtic system of
         climates upon the western borders of the old conti-
         nent, the isothermal lines are again raised, being
         convex towards the pole. The tropic of Cancer
         passes between Cape Bojador and Cape Blanco,
         near the river Onro, upon the inhospitable confines
         of the desert of Sahara, and the mean temperature
                                                                   CLIMATE.
159
    of those countries is necessarily hotter than that of
    Havana, for the double reason of their position upon
    a western coast, and the proximity of the desert,
    which reflects the heat, and scatters particles of sand
    in the atmosphere.
      We have already seen that the great declinations
    of temperature in the island of Cuba are of so short
    duration, that neither the banana, the sugar-cane,
    nor the other productions of the torrid zone, suffer
    the slightest detriment. Every one is aware how
    readily plants, that have great organic vigor, sustain
    momentary cold, and that the orange-trees in the
    vicinity of Genoa resist snow-storms and a degree
    of cold not lower than 0° or 7° C. below zero (21°.2
    or 19°.4 F. above zero).
      As the vegetation of Cuba presents an identity of
    character with that of regions near the equator, it is
    very extraordinary to find there, even in the plains,
    a vegetation of the colder climates, identical with
    that of the mountains of Southern Mexico. In other
    works, I have called the attention of botanists to
    this extraordinary phenomenon in the geography of
    plants. The pine {pinus ocoidentalis), is not found
    in the Lesser Antilles, and according to Mr. Bobert
    Brown, not even in Jamaica (between 17f° and 18°
    of latitude), notwithstanding the elevation of the
    Blue Mountains in that island. Further north only
         160              humboldt’s ouba.
         do we begin to find it, in the mountains of St.
         Domingo, and throughout the island of Cuba, which
         extend from 20° to 23° of latitude. There, it attains
         a height of sixty or seventy feet, and what is still
         more strange, the pine and the mahogany grow side
         by side in the plains of the Isle of Pines., The pine
         is also found in the southeastern part of Cuba, on
         the sides of the Cobre Mountains, where the soil is
         arid and sandy.
            The interior plain of Mexico is covered with this
         same class of coniferas, if we may rely upon the
         comparison made by Bonpland and myself, with the
         specimens we brought from Acaguisotla, the snow
         mountain of Toluca, and the Cofre of Perote, for
         these do not seem to differ specifically from the
         pinus occidentalis of the Antilles, as described by
         Schwartz. But these pines, which we find at the
         level of the sea in Cuba, between the 20° and 22° of
         latitude, and only upon its southern side, do not
         descend lower than 3,200 feet above that level upon
         the Mexican continent, between the parallels of 1'7P
         and 19£°. I have even observed that on the road
         from Perote to Jalapa, on the eastern mountains of
         Mexico, opposite to Cuba, the limit of the pines is
         5,950 feet, while on the western mountains, between
         Chilpancingo and Acapulco, near Cuasiniquilapa,
         two degrees further south, it descends to 3,900 feet,
                                                                 CLIMATE.
1C1
   and at some points, perhaps, even to the line of
   2,860 feet.
     These anomalies of position are very rare under
   the torrid zone, and depend probably less on the
   temperature than on the soil. In the system of the
   migration of plants, we should suppose that the
   pirns occidentalis of Cuba had come from Yucatan,
   before the opening of the channel between Cape
   Catoche and Cape San Antonio, and not, by any
   means, from the United States, although the conifer-
   ous plants abound there, for the species of whose
   geography we arc treating has not yet been found in
   Florida,
     The following table exhibits the results of observa-
   tions of temperature, made at Ubajay, in Cuba.
           1796.  1797.  1798. 1799.  
January,   05° F. 640 F. 680 y 610 F. 
February,  72     C6     69    63     
March,     71     C4     68*   64     
April,     n      68     70    68     
May,       78*    77     73    76     
June,      80     81     83    85     
July,      82*-   80     85    87     
August,    83     84      82 ‘ 84     
September, 81     811    80    86     
October,   78     751    791   73     
November,  75     70     71    61     
December,  63     67*    60    59     
162
                          iiomboldt’s CUBA.
         The village of Ubajay, as I have before said, lies
       about five maritime leagues from Havana, in a plain
       242 feet above the level of the sea. The partial
       mean temperature of December, 1795, was 18°.6 C.
       (65°.84 F.); that of January and February, 1800,
       had varied from 13°.8 C. (56°.84 F.) to 18°.9 C.
       (66°.12 F.) by Nairne’s thermometer.
                   MEAN OP OBSERVATIONS AT HAVANA.
           1800. 1810-12. 
January,         70° F.   
February,  ---   720      
March,     700 F 790      
April,     720.9 780.6    
May,       770.9 82°.2    
June,      860   820.7    
July,      80°.5 820.9    
August,    820.9 830.4    
September, 790   820.6    
October,   790.9 790.5    
November,  720.  750.6    
December,  740.8 700      
Mean,      780.3 780.3    
         Comparison betweeen the mean temperature in the
       interior and on the shore of Cuba and at Cumana, in
       South America. See following table..
CLIMATE.
168
                        Ubtijay, int.  Havana     Oumani     
                           of Cuba.    coast. N. lat nr 27'. 
December to February...   ,.640 4 F.   710.2      800.4      
March to May..........  .7P.2          790.2      830.7      
June to August.......   .8P.8          830,3      82°.0      
September to November , 00             780.6      820.6      
                        $                                    
Mean ...............    .730.2         780.3     ' 81°.7     
Coldest months ........ .620.0         70°.0      790.2      
Hottest .........       ,830.5         830.4      840.4.     
At Rome, N. lat. 41° 53'---Mean temp.         590 F.         
                        Hottest month......   . 77O.0        
                   « t*      Coldest “        > 420.3        
    During the last fifteen days of the year 1800, I
  observed the centigrade thermometer almost con-
  stantly between 10° and 15° (50° and 59° F). ‘ At
  the hacienda Rio Blanco (in Cuba), it fell in January
  to 7°.5 C. (45°.5 F.) In the country near Havana,
  on a hill 318 feet above the level of the sea, water
  has frozen, the ice being several lines in thickness.
  Senior Robredo informed me of this fact, which
  again occurred in December, 1812, after a preva-
  lence of very strong northerly winds for nearly a
  month.
    As it snows in the flat countries of Europe, when
  the thermometer is several degrees above zero,
  (32° F.), it is surprising that in no part of this island,
  nor even in the hills of San Juan, nor in the high
  mountains of Trinidad, has it ever been known to
164
                       humboldt’s Cuba.
      j
       snow; and frost is known only on the crests of these
       hills and of the Copper Mountains. We must suppose
       that other conditions than the rapid fall of tempera-
       ture in the upper regions of the air are needed for it
       to hail and snow.
          I have stated elsewhere that it has never been
       known to hail at Cumana, and very rarely in
       Havana, happening only once in fifteen years, during
       violent electrical explosions and S.S.W. winds. At
       Kingston, Jamaica, the fall of the thermometer at
       sunrise to 20°.5 (69° F.), is cited as an extraordinary
       phenomenon. In that island we must ascend the
       Blue Mountains to the height of 7,325 feet, to see
       it fall to 8°.3 (47° F.) in the month of August. At
       Cumana, 10° N. lat., I have not known the ther-
       mometer to to fall to 20°. 8 (69°.4 F.).
          Changes of temperature occur very suddenly in
       Havana. In April, 1804, the variation of the ther-
       mometer in the shade, within the space of three
       hours, was from 32°.2 to 23°.4C. (89° to 74°.1F.),
       that is, 9° C. (16°.2 F.), which is very considerable
       in the torrid zone, and twice as great as the varia-
       tion found on the coast of Colombia, further south.
       The inhabitants of Havana (H. lat. 23° 8') complain
       of cold when the temperature falls rapidly to 21° C.
       (69°,8 F.), and in Cumana (H. lat. 10° 28'), when it ••
       falls to 23° 0. (73°.4 F.) In April, 1804, water sub-
                                                               CLIMATE.
165
  jected to rapid evaporation of heat, and which was
 deemed very cool, stood at 24° A 0. (75°.9F.),.while
 the mean temperature of the air was 29°.3 C.
 (84°.7 F.)
    A collection of many careful observations: of the
internal heat of the earth on the confines of the tor-
rid zone, would be interesting. In the caverns of
the limestone formation, near San Antonio de Beita
(Cuba), and in the springs of the Chorrora river, I
have found it to be between 22° and 23° C. (71°.6
and 73°.4F.), and Senor Ferrer observed it at
24°.4C. (75°.9 F.) in a well one hundred feet deep.
These observations, which perhaps have not been
made under advantageous circumstances, show a
temperature of the earth much lower than that of
the air, which is seen to be 25°.7 C. (78°.3F.) at
Havana, and 23° C. (73°.4 F.) in the interior of the
island, at an elevation of 255 feet. These results do
not conform with observations made at other places
in the temperate and glacial zones. Do the very
deep currents which carry the water of the poles
towards the regions of the equator, diminish the in-
ternal temperature of the earth in islands of narrow
breadth? We have treated this delicate question in
relating our experience in the caverns of Guacharo,
near Caripe. It is stated that in the wells of Kings-
ton, Jamaica, and the low lands of Guadalupe, the
166
                       humboldt’b Cuba..
       thermometer has been observed at 27°.7, 28°.6, and
       27°.2 C. (81°9, 83°.5, and 81° F.), consequently at a
       temperature equal to that of the air at these places.
         The great changes of temperature to which coun-
       tries on the borders of the torrid zone are subject,
       have a connection with certain oscillations of the
       barometer, which are not observed in the regions
       near the equator. At Havana, as well as at Vera '
       Cruz, the regular variations of atmospheric pressure
       experienced at determinate hours of the day, are
       interrupted when strong northerly winds prevail.
       I have observed that the barometer in Cuba gene-
       rally stands, when the sea-breeze is blowing, at 0.765,
       and that it fell to 0.756, and even lower, when the
       south wind blew.
         It has been stated in another place, that the mean
       barometrical altitudes of the months when the baro-
       meter is highest (December and January), vary in
       respect to the months when the barometer is lowest
       (August and September), from 7 to 8 millimetres,
       that is to say, almost as much as at Paris, and five
       or six times more than at the equator, and 10° north
       and south latitude.
            Mean altitude.—December.......0.76656 or 22.1 Cent, of T.
                   «       January........ 0.76809 “ 21.2    “
                   “       July...........0.76453  “ 28.5    “
                   «       August........ 0.76123  “ 28,8
                                                                CLIMATE.
167
     During the three years 1810-1812, when Senior
  Ferrer took the mean altitudes, the extreme varia-
  tion on those days when the mercury rose or fell
  most in the barometer, did not exceed thirty milli-
  metres. In order to exhibit the accidental oscilla-
  tions of each month, I present here the table of
  observations in 1801, in the hundredth parts of an
  English inch, according to the manuscript notes of
  Don Antonio Eobredo.
       Maximum.  Minimum. Mean. Mean.        
                                temperature. 
January,   30.35    29.9G 30.24      14.5 R. 
February,  30.38    30.01 30.26 15.6         
March,     30.41    30.20 30.32     15.5     
April,     30.39    30.32 30.35     17.2     
May,       30.44    30.38 30.39     19.4     
J line,    30.36    30.33 30.34     22.2     
July,      29.38    29.52 30.22     22.4     
August,    30.26    30.12 30.16           CO 
                                           K 
September, 29.18    29.82 30.12     21.0     
October,   30.16    30.04 30.08 18.6         
November,  30.18    30.09 30.12 16.5         
December,  30.26    30.02 30.08 12.1         
  Hurricanes are less frequent in Cuba than in St.
Domingo, Jamaica, and the Lesser Antilles situate
east and south of Cape Cruz; for we should hot
confound the violent north winds with the hurricanes,
which most generally blow from the S.S.E,.or the
168
htjmboldt’s ctjba.
         S.S.W. At the time 1 visited the island of Cuba, nc
         hurricane had occurred since the month of August,
         1774, for the gale of the 2d November, 1796, was
         too light to be so called.
            The season when these violent and terrible move-
         ments of the atmosphere occur in Cuba, during
         which a furious wind prevails, varying to every
         point of the compass, and frequently accompanied
         by lightning and hail, is during the last of August,
         the month of September, and particularly that of
         October. In St. Domingo and the Caribbean Isles,
         those most feared by seamen occur during July,
         August, September, and the first fifteen days of
         October.- Hurricanes are most frequent there in the
         month of August, so that this phenomenon manifests
         itself later as we proceed toward the we6t.
            Violent southeast winds also prevail at Havana,
         during the month of March. No one in the Antilles
         acknowledges that the hurricanes have their regular
         periods. Seventeen occurred from 1770 to 1795,
         while from 1788 to 1804, none were experienced in
         Martinique. In the year 1642, three occurred.
            It is worthy of notice that at the two extremities
         of the long cordillera of the Antilles (the S.E. and
         N.W.), hurricanes are least frequent. The islands
         of Tobago and Trinidad, happily, never experience'
         them, and in Cuba, these violent ruptures of the
                                                                   Or, [MATE.
169
atmospheric equilibrium rarely occur. When they
do happen, the destruction they cause is greater at
sea than on the land, and more upon the southern
and southeastern coast, than upon the northern and
northwestern. In 1527, the famous expedition of
Panfilo de Narvaez was partly destroyed by one in
the harbor of Trinidad de Cuba.
         [Note.—Since the visit of Baron Humboldt to Cuba,
in the' beginning of the present century, only two
hurricanes have been experienced there. The first
■ of these occurred on the 4th and 5th of October,
1844. It began about ten o’clock on the evening of
the 4th, and continued with great violence until
daylight, when the point of greatest descent of the
barometer, 28.27, was observed. From that time,
it subsided, and the torrents of rain began to cease,
but the wind continued to blow with great violence
i until 10 A.M. This storm passed over all the zone
of country comprised between Bahia Honda and
Sierra Morena on the north, and Galafi '* and Cien-
fuegos on the south side of Cuba. One hundred and
fifty-eight vessels were wrecked in the harbors and
on the coasts, and one hundred and one lives were
lost. The crops suffered severely, and 2.546 houses
were destroyed. The second hurricane occurred in
the following year, and was more destructive than
                              8
170
.Humboldt’s cuba.
             the preceding one. It began about midnight of the
             10th October, and increased in violence, with tor-
             rents of rain and spray, until 10 30 A.M. of the
             11th, when the barometer had fallen to 27.06, the
             lowest point it has ever been known to touch in
             Cuba. Its ravages extended over nearly the same
             extent of country with that of 1844, but its greatest •
             violence was confined to a circle of about forty miles
             radius round Havana. Two hundred and twenty-
             six vessels were lost, 1,872 houses were blown down,
             5,051 partially destroyed, and 114 persons perished.
             During both of these hurricanes, the wind veered to
             every point of the compass, and the salt spray was
             carried fifteen or twenty miles inland, blackening
             vegetation as though fire had passed over it.—
             (Arboleya, Manual de la Ida de Cuba.)
               To the foregoing admirable view of the climate of
             Cuba, by Baron Humboldt, wo can only add the fol-
             lowing tables and remarks from Don Ramon de la
             Sagra’s “ Historia Fisica, Politica y Natural de la'
             Isla de Cuba.” The indications of the rain-gauge
             are in English inches, and the hygrometer is express-
             ed by Deluc’s scale.
                                                              CLIMATE.
171
         BAIN FALLEN AT HAVANA, AND MONTHLY MEAN OF
         HYGROMETER.
            1811. 1812. 1818. 1814. ' 1815. Mean. Hygrom. 
January .  . 0.00 7.14   0.20 1.70  3.6V    3,17  15.12   
February   . 0.00 1.98   0.54 3.08  2.17    1.94  56.08   
March      , 1.70 3.15   0.48 2.90  0.25    1.70  53.71   
April.....   3.60 2.40   0.00 5.90  0.15    2.41  52.04   
May......    2.05 2.63   5.55 3.67  3.10    3.40  51.84   
June.....   11.26 0.00  .5.35 6.50  6.69    5.94  55.42   
July         8.33 2.75   6,31 8.42  2.35    5.63  56.34   
August...    2.89 2.57   4,35 1.75  1.61    2.66  54.44   
September    7,27 1.61   4.37 5,40  6,17    4.75  54.60   
October ..   0.90 5.41   8.92 0,73  8.71    4,93  55.40   
November     1.40 0.75   1,30 0.62  4.93    1.80  56.10   
December     1.45 0.36   2,38 0.90  1.44    1.43  54.95   
Totals ..  40.85  31.35 39.75 41.57 40.14   39.76 54.67   
      “Notwithstanding the frequency of rain during
     the hot season, that is during the months of July
     August, and September, these months do not pre-
     sent the greatest number of cloudy days. The rains
     of summer, although copious, are of short duration,
     and those days on which showers do not fall, are in
     general perfectly cloudless. It may almost be said
     that during these months no clouds are to be seen in
     the atmosphere, except while the shower is falling,
     while in the other months cloudy days sometimes
     occur without rain. Days during which the heavens
              172               humboldt’s cuba.
                                                             t
              are completely clouded are extremely rare in Cuba:
              we give from our diary the mean of our observations
              for each month:
                 Cloudy     Clear and par¬    
                  days.   tially cloudy days. 
January......                     26          
February ....       8             20          
March.........                    24          
April..........                   25          
May.....        . ... 8           23          
June.........   ..... 6           24          
July .........  . ... 6           25          
August.......       6             25          
September ....  ..... 7           23          
October......   . ... 7           24          
November.....   , ... 8           22          
December....    ..... 7           24          
     Total .... ...... 80         285         
              “ These tables will give some idea of the beauty
            of the sky in these regions, and of its effect upon the
            life and luxuriant growth of vegetation. A high
            temperature, moderated by great evaporation, which
            pours through the atmosphere a continuous torrent of
            watery vapors, presents the most favorable conditions
            for the development of an admirable vegetation;
            which again contributes, on its part, to maintain the
            humidity of the atmosphere—soul of its exuberant life.
            Thus it is that through all seasons of the year the
                                                                   CLIMATE.
173
           fields and forests of Cuba preserve tlieir verdure; but
           it is principally at the beginning of summer, during
           the rainy season, that all nature there seems to bo
           transformed to flowers.”
          174             humboldt's ouba.
                       CHAPTER IV.
                             GEOGRAPHY. *
          Banks and reefs round Cuba-North coast—South coast—Territorial
            divisions — Judiciary—Ecclesiastical—Politico-mili tary—Public
            Finances—Proposed new division—Present dividing line of bish-
            oprics—Number of parishes—Popular territorial divisions—First
            governor—[Note, Maritime subdivision.]
            I might have cited, among the causes of the low
          temperature in Cuba, during the winter months, the
          numerous shoals that surround the island, on which
          the temperature of the sea is greatly diminished,
          partly by the polar currents which seek the abysses
          of the tropical ocean, and partly by the mixing of
          the surfed© and the deep waters on the steep sides of
          the banks; but this cause of fall in the temperature
          is partly compensated by that river of warm water ■
          (the Gulf Stream), which bathes the whole extent of
          the northwestern shore of Cuba, and whose rapid
          flow is often delayed there by the northern and
          northwestern winds.
                        The chain of shoals that surrounds this island, and
GEOGRAPHY.
176
       which appears like a shading in our maps, is fortu-
       nately broken in many places; and these interrup-
       tions afford to commerce a free access to the shore.
       The parts of the island which are least dangerous,
       and most free from reefs, sandbanks, and -rocks, are
       the southeastern side, between Cape Cruz, and Cape
       Maysi (72 maritime leagues), and the northwestern,
       between Matanzas and Cabanas (28 leagues). On
       the southeastern side, the proximity of high moun-
       tains makes the shore bold; there we find the har-
       bors of St. Jago de Cuba, Guantanamo, Baitiquiri,
       and, doubling Cape Maysi, Baracoa. This last-named
       port was the first one settled by Europeans.
         The north side of the island, from Cape Mulas,
       N.N.W. of Baracoa, to the port of Nuevitas, is
       equally free from banks and reefs. East of Cape
       Mulas, ships find excellent anchorage in the bays of'
       Tanamo, Cab'onico, and Nipe, and, west of that
       cape, in the bays of Sama, Naranjo, Padre, and
       Nuevas Grandes. The uninterrupted series of cays
       lining the old Bahama-Channel, and extending from
       Nuevitas to Point Hicacos, a distance of ninety-four
       leagues, commences near the bay of Nuevas Grandes,
       almost under the same meridian with the beginning
       of the Buena Esperanza Banks, on the south side,
       which are prolonged to the Isle of Pines.
         The narrowest part of the old Bahama Channel is
176
                          humboldt’s Cuba,
          between Cape Cruz and Cay Romano, where it is
          barely five or six leagues wide. The shoalest part
          of the Great Bahama Banks is also in this vicinity.
          The islands and parts of this bank not covered by
          water (Long Island, Eleuthera, &c.), are very exten-
          sive ; and, should the level of the ocean fall twenty
          or thirty feet, an island larger than Haiti would
          appear here upon its surface. The chain of cays
          and reefs that lines the shore of Cuba is so broken
          that it affords small hut clear channels to the
          harbors of Guanaja, Moron, and Remedies.
          • Passing through the old Bahama Channel, or,
          more properly speaking, through San Nicholas’
          Channel, between Cruz del Padre and the cays of
          Cay Sal-bank, many of which have springs of fresh
          water, we again find a safe coast from Point Hicacos
          to Cabanas bay, with the harbors of Matanzas, Puerto
          Escondido, Havana, and Muriel. Further west,,
          beyond the harb.or of Bahia Honda, the possession
          of whigh might well tempt any maritime power at
          war with Spain, the chain of shoals and reefs (Santa
          Isabel and Colorados), again commences, and con-
          tinues, without interruption, to Cape San Antonio.
             On the south side, the shore from this cape to
          Point Picjdras and the Bay of Cortes is very hold,
          and gives no soundings; but between Point Piedras
          and Cape Cruz, nearly all of the coast is covered
                                                          GEOGRAPHY.
177
      with shoals, of which the Isle of Pines is but a
      part, not covered by water. The western portion is
      known as the Jardines and Jardinillos—the eastern
      as Gay Breton, Cays de Doce Leguas, and the bank
      of Buena Esperanza. The navigation of all this
      extent of southern coast is dangerous, except from
      the Bay of Oochinos to the mouth of the river
      Guaurabo.
        The resistance offered by the elevated land of the
      Isle of Pines to the ocean currents, may be said to
      favor at once the accumulation of sand and the
      labors of the coral insect, which thrives in still and
      shallow water. In this extent of one hundred and
      forty-five^leagues of coast, but one-seventh of it,
      lying between Cay de Piedras and Cay Blanco, a
      little west of the harbor of Casilda, presents a dear
      shore with harbors; these are the roadstead of Bata-
      bano, and the bays of Jagua and Casilda. East
      from the latter port, toward the mouth of the river
      Canto and Cape Cruz (inside of Cay de Doce
      Leguas), the shore, which is full of springs, is very
      shallow and inaccessible, and almost entirely unin-
      habited.
        In Cuba, as formerly in all the Spanish posses-
      sions of America, we find those subdivisions of the
      country which have so puzzled modern geographers;
      these are the Ecclesiastical, the Politico-Military, the
                                     8*
            178                 humboldt’s  ouba.
            Public Finances, and the Judiciary. We shall not
            speak of the latter, as the island has but one Audi-
            encia, which was established at Puerto Principe, in
            1797, its jurisdiction extending from Baracoa to
            Cape San Antonio.1
               The ecclesiastical division of two bishoprics dates
            from 1788, when Pope Pius YI., created the first
            bishop of Havana. The island of Cuba, together
            with Louisiana and Florida, was formerly a part of
            the archbishopric of St. Domingo, and from the
            time of its discovery constituted but one bishopric,
            which was founded at Baracoa, in 1518, by Pope
            Leo X. This bishopric was translated to St. Jago
            de Cuba, in 1522, but the first bishop, Friar Juan de
            Ubite, did not reach his diocess until 1528. In the
            beginning of the present century (1804), the bishop
            of St. Jago was created archbishop.
               In the Politico-Military government, the island is
            divided into two departments, both subordinate to
            the captain-general. That of Havana comprises,
            besides the capital, the districts of Nueva Filipinas,
            Cuatro Yillas (Trinidad, Santi Espiritu, Villa Clara,
            and San Juan de los Bemedios), and Puerto Prin-
              1 Another Audiencia was established at Havana, in 1839, and the
            island divided into two judiciary districts. The Audiencia of
            Puerto Principe- was subsequently abolished, and its jurisdiction
            united with that of Havana.
                                                          GEOGRAPHY.
179
        cipe. The captam-general, who is also governor
        of the department of Havana, appoints a lieute-
        nant-governor for each of the several districts. The
        jurisdiction of the captain-general extends also as
        Gorregidor to eight municipalities, being the cities
        of Matanzas, Jaruco, San Felipe y Santiago, and
        Santa Maria del Rosario, and the towns of Guana-
        bacoa, Santiago de las Yegas, Guinea, and San Anto-
        nio de los Banos.
          The department of Cuba comprises the district of
        that name, and those of Baracoa, Holguin, and
        Bayamo. The boundaries of these two departments
        are not the same. with those of the ecclesiastical
        divisions.; as, for instance, the district of Puerto
        Principe, with seven parishes, was subject, in 1814,
        to the governor of Havana, and to the bishop of
        St. Jago de Cuba. In the census of 1817-20, Puerto
        Principe is united, with Bayamo and Baracoa, to the
        department of Cuba.1
          We have only to consider the third subdivision,
          1 In 1827, the Politico-Military constitution was re-organized, and
        the island was divided into three departments—Western, Central,
        and Eastern—with some alterations in the districts, required by the
        increase of population. This subdivision continued until 1850,
        when the old form of two departments was re-established—the dis-
        trict of Puerto Principe being placed und^r the jurisdiction of the
        governor of the Eastern department.
180
humboldt’s Cuba.
           wliicli appertains entirely to the administration of
           the revenue. By a royal decree of 23 March 1812,
           three intendencies or provinces were created, viz.:
           Havana, Puerto Principe, and St. Jago de Cuba,
           which extend, from east to west, about 90, 70, and
           65 leagues, respectively. The intendant of Havana
           retains the title and prerogatives of sub-delegate-
           superintendent-general of the royal treasury of
           Cuba. Under this subdivision, the intendancy of
           St. Jago de Cuba comprises that district, and those
           of Baracoa, Holguin, Bayamo,. Gibara, Manzanillo,
           Jiguam, Cobro, and Las Tunas. That of Puerto
           Principe comprises the district of that name, and
           those of Nuevitas, Jagua, Santi Espiritu, San Juan
           de Iqs Remedios, Villa Clara, and Trinidad. The.
           intendancy of Havana comprises all that part of the
           island lying west of the district of Ouatro Villas.
           The intendant resides at Havana.
             When the island shall become more advanced in
           population and agriculture, it would seem to be more
           convenient and more in conformity with the historic
           recollections of the times of the conquest, that it
           should he divided into five departments; that of the
           Vuelta Abajo, extending from Cape San Antonio to
           the beautiful town of Gnamijay and Mari el; Havana,
           from Mariel to Alvarez; Cuatro Villas, from Alva-
           rez to Moron ; Puerto Prmcipe, from Moron to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i.
GEOGRAPHY.
181
1.1;
lu:
■ v
y
t..
i
j •
river Cauto; and Cuba, from the Cauto to Cape
     Maysi.
          The dividing line of the two bishoprics runs from
   the mouth of Santa Maria Creek, on the south coast,,
   to Point Judas, opposite Cay Ilornano, on the north.
   During the short time that the rule of the Spanish
   constitution extended to Cuba, the ecclesiastical
   ; , division also served for that of the representative
   districts of Havana and St. Jago. '
            The diocess of Havana contains forty parishes,
          and that of St. Jago twenty-two, which, having been
          established at a time when the island contained only
          cattle or grazing farms, are very large, aiid ill-
          adapted to the wants of the present population.1
' :          The   most    common     and   popular   territorial divi-
          sions, with the people of Havana, are the Vuelta
          Arriba and the Yuelta de , lying east and west
          of the meridian of Havana. The first captain-
          general of the island was Don Pedro Valdez,,
          appointed in 1601. Sixteen governors had preceded
          him, the first of whom was the famous Poblador and
          Conquistador, Diego Velazques, a native of Cuellar,
          in Spain, who was appointed by Diego Colon, at
          that time admiral and governor of St. Domingo.
            1 Under the present ecclesiastical Arrangement, the diocess of
          ITavana contains one hundred and sixteen, and that of St. Jago
          forty-one parishes.
        182                 Humboldt’s ouba.
           [Note.—There is now another territorial'subdivi-
        sion in Cuba, known as the Marine department.
        The island is divided into five districts, which are
        Havana, Trinidad, San Juan de los Remedios, Nue-
        vitas, and St. Jago de Cuba. The head-quarters of
        the Spanish naval power in America is established
        at Havana.]
                           POPULATION.
183
                             CHAPTER V.
                           POPULATION.
       Its political importance—Former census—Population in 1825
         —Compared with other Antilles—Relative proportions of races
         in slave countries—Reflections—Why slaves have not dimin-
         ished since 1820—Proportions of free, and slaves, and of
         sexes—Fears on cessation of slave trade—Why unfounded—
         Distribution of population in 1811—Free colored seek the towns
         —Relative density—Census of 1775—Of 1791—Their contradic-
         tions—Corrections—Motion in Spanish Cortes for abolition of
         slavery—Remonstrance from Cuba—Census of 1817—Is not com-
         plete—Mode of estimating increase—Relative increase of classes
         —Several causes of increase—Rate—Excessive between 1791 and
         1810—Unequal distribution of classes—[Note.—Census of T827,
         1841, and 1846—Reasons for distrusting that of 184G—Supposed
         decrease of slaves—Its improbability—Reasons therefor—Increase
         of slaves—Annual rate of total increase—Present population.]
         In the preceding chapters, we have examined the
       area, geological constitution, and climate of a coun-
       try opening a vast field to civilized man. That we
       may duly appreciate the influence which the richest
       of the Antilles, under the stimulus of great natural
       elements of power, may some day exercise in the
       political balance of insular America, let us compare
184
humboldt’s ouba.
          lier present population with that she can maintain
          upon her 3,000 square leagues of country, the
          greater, part of which is very fertile under the
          abundant tropical rains, and is still unconscious of
          the presence of man.
            Three successive, but very inexact enumerations
          have stated the population as follows:—
                             In 1775, 170,862.
                               1791,  272,140.
                               1817,  630,980.
            According to this last census, there were, in the
          island, 290,021 whites, 115,651 free colored and
          225,268 slaves. These results agree very well with
          the interesting papers on this subject, laid before the
          Spanish Cortes in 1811, by the Ayuntamicnto of
          Havana, in which the approximate population was
          stated to be 600,000 souls, viz.:—274,000 whites,
          114,000 free colored, and 212,000 slaves.
            If we take into consideration the several omis-
          sions tliat. occurred in the census of 1817, the number
          of slaves imported (there were entered, at the
          Havana custom-house, during the three years,
          1818-19, and 20, more than 41,000), and the ratio
          of increase of the white and free colored population,
          in the eastern part of the island, as shown in the two
          census of 1810 and 1817, we shall fin'd the probable
          population of Cuba, at the close of 1825, to lie—
POPULATION.
                                                  185
Whites,       325,000 
Free colored, 130,000 
Slaves,       260,000 
Total,        715,000 
        ■ Consequently, the population of Cuba, at the
       present time (1825), is very nearly equal to that of
       all the English Antilles, and almost double that
       of Jamaica. The relative proportion of the inhabi-
       tants, according to race and state of civil liberty,
       presents the most extraordinary contrasts in those
       countries where slavery has taken great root. The
       following statement shows these proportions, and
       gives rise to deep and grave reflections.
            COMPARATIVE POPULATION OF THE ANTILLES AND THE
            UNITED STATES.
              Population. White, Free colored.  Slave..       Ratio.    
Cuba,             715,000 325,000 130,000       200,000     46: 18:36   
Jamaica,          402,000 ■ 25,000 35,000       342,000      6 : 9 : 85 
English           770,500 71,350 78,350         ' 626,800   9 :10: 81   
Antilles,                                                               
All the                                                                 
Antilles,      .2,843.000 482,000 1,212,000     1,147,900  17 : 43: 40  
U, States,     10,525,000 8,575,000 285,000     1,665,000    81: 3: 15. 
1 The official census of 1827 states the population in that year as     
  follows
                              Whites,         811,051
                              tfree colored, 106,494 ,
                              Slaves,         286,942
                                  Total,
                                                        704,487
            186              humboldt’s cuba.
              We perceive by this table, that the free population
            in Cuba is .64 of the whole population; in the Eng-
            lish Antilles it is barely .19. In all the Antilles the
            colored population (blacks and mulattoes, free and
            slave), forms a total of 2,360,000, or .83 of the entire
            population.
              If the legislation of the Antilles, and the condition
            of the colored population, does not soon experience .
            some salutary change, and if discussion without
            action is continued, the political preponderance will
            will pass into the hands of that class which holds the
            power of labor, the will to throw off the yoke, and
            valor to undergo great privations. This bloody
            catastrophe will occur as the necessary consequence
            of circumstances, and without the free negroes of
            Haiti taking any part whatever, they continuing .
            always the isolated policy they have adopted. Who
            shall dare to predict the influence which an
            Confederation of the Free States of the         ,
            lying»between Colombia, North America and Gua-
            temala, might have in the politics of the New
            World ?
              The fear that such an event might be realized, un-
            doubtedly operates more powerfully upon the minds
            of men, than do the principles of humanity and
            justice; but in all the islands the whites believe
            themselves to be the strongest; for simultaneous
                                                              POPULATION.
187
      action on the part of the negroes, seems to them im-
      possible, and every change, or concession made to a
      population subject to servitude, is deemed to be
      cowardice. But it is not yet too late, for the hor-
      rible catastrophe of St. Domingo happened because
      of the inefficiency of the government. Such are the
      illusions which prevail with the great mass of the
      colonists of the Antilles, and form an obstacle to im-
      provement in the state of the negroes in Georgia
      and the Carolinas. The island of Cuba may free
      lierself better than the other islands from the com-
      mon shipwreck, for she has 455,000 freemen, while
      the slaves number only 260,000 ; and she may pre-
      pare gradually for the abolition of slavery, availing
      herself for this purpose, of humane and prudent
      measures. Do not let us forget that since Haiti be-
      came emancipated, there are already in the Antilles
      more free negroes and mulattoes than slaves. The
      whites, and more particularly the free blacks, who
      may easily make common cause with the slaves,
      increase rapidly in Cuba.
        The slave population of Cuba would have dimin-
      ished with great rapidity since 1820, had it not been
      for the fraudulent continuance of the slave-trade with
      Africa. If this infamous traffic should cease entirely,
      through the advance of civilization, and the energetic
      will of the new States of Free America, the servile
188
                                JUJMISOLKt’s CUBA.
                                                                 r
             population would diminish largely for some time,
             because of the existing disproportion between the
             sexes, and because many would continue to attain
             their liberty. This decrease would not cease until
             the relative proportion of births and deaths should
             compensate even for the slaves freed.1
               The whites and free colored comprise nearly two-
             thirds of theeutire population of the island; and by
             their increase we already perceive, in part at least,
             the'relative decrease of the slave population. The
             The proportion of women to men among this class,
             exclusive of the mulatto slaves, is as 1 to 4 on the
             sugar estates; in the whole island it is as 1 to 1.7;
             in the cities and luiciendas, where the negro slaves
             are servants, or hire their time from their masters, it
             is as 1 to 1.4, and even (in Havana for example) a&
             1 to 1.2.
               The prognostications which some too lightly make,
             of a decrease in the entire population of the island
             upon the actual cessation of the African slave-trade,
             (not its legal cessation which occurred in 1820); of
             the impossibility of continuing the cultivation of
             sugar on a large scale; of the approach of a time when
             the agricultural interest of Cuba will become reduced
             to the planting of coffee and tobacco, and the breed-
                            1 See note at the end of this chapter.
                                                           POPULATION
189
     ing of cuttle, are founded upon arguments which do
     not seem to me sufficiently conclusive.
       They do not take into consideration the fact, that
     but one-sixth of the total number of slaves are on
     the sugar plantations, many of which are not suf-
     ficiently stocked with hands, and consequently
     debilitate their slaves by frequent night-labor, while
     the problem of the pro rata increase of the total
     population of Cuba, when the importation of negroes
     from Africa shall have ceased entirely, is based upon
     elements so complicated, upon such various com-
     pensations of effect upon the white, free-colored,
     and slave rural population on the sugar, coffee, and
     tobacco plantations; the slaves on the grazing farms,
     and those who are servants, laborers, and mechanics,
     in the cities, that we should not anticipate such
     mournful presages, but wait until positive statistical
     data have been obtained.
       The spirit in which the censuses have been taken,
     even the oldest, that of 1775, for example, marking
     the distinctions of age, sex, race, and state of civil
     liberty, is worthy of the highest praise. The means '
     of execution only have been wanting, for the
     government has recognized how important it is for
     the tranquillity of the inhabitants to know minutely
     the occupation of the negroes, their numerical dis-
     tribution in the sugar estates, farms, and cities. To
          190             humboldt’s cub a.
          remedy the evil, to prevent public calamities, and to
          console the unfortunate beings who belong to an ill-
          treated race, and who are feared -more than is
          acknowledged, it is necessary to probe the sore; for
          there exists in social, as well as organic bodies,
          reparative forces, which, when well directed, may
          triumph over the most inveterate evils.
            In 1811, when the Ayuntamiento and the Consu-
          lar/o estimated the total population of the island at
          600,000, of which 326,000 were colored, free aud
          slave; the distribution of this mass ot negroes,
          between the towns and the rural districts, showed
          the following results, comparing each partial num-
          ber with the whole number of blacks, considered as
          a unit:
Western department.     Free.  Slave. Total. 
In towns,..........     ...11     114 22*    
In rural districts..... ... l* 34     35*    
Eastern department.                          
In towns,..........                94 204-   
In rural districts,.... ... 11    104 21*    
                          m       654 100    
               It appears, from this table, which may be subject
             to correction by subsequent investigations, that, in
             1811, nearly three-fifths of the blacks resided in the
             district of Havana, between Cape Sah Antonio ami
             Alvarez; that, in that part of the island, there were
                                                               POPULATION.
191
      as many free negroes as slaves, but that the total
      colored population of the townB, compared with that
      of the country, was as 2 to 3. On the other hand,
      in the eastern portion of the island, from Alvarez to
      St. Jago de Cuba, the number of blacks living in
      the towns was nearly equal to that in the country.1 *
      We shall see, further on, that between the years
      1811 and 1825, Cuba received, through licit and
      illicit channels, 185,000 African negroes, of which
      nearly 116,000 were entered $t the custom-house of
      Havana, between 1811 and 1820. This recently
      imported mass has undoubtedly been distributed
      more in the country than in the towns, and will
      have affected the estimated ^proportions which well-
        1 This disposition of the free blacks to abandon the rural districts,
      and gather in the towns, is very striking, and worthy of careful
      study by social economists. The form of the latest census returns
      in Cuba, does not enable us to institute the exact comparison here
      made by Bar&n Humboldt; but that of 1846 shows that the city of
      Havana and suburbs, contained the following proportions of the
      total population of the Western department:
                                        White, FreeCol’d, Slave*.
                 Havana,.................  29      61      11
                 Rest of department,.... 71        49      89
        It would be interesting to know if the same tendency to abandon
      the rural districts exists among the free negroes of St. Domingo aud
      Jamaica, and, if so, what effect it has upon their social and moral
      condition.
192
humboldt’b cub a.
             informed persons had ascertained in 1811, as existing
             between the eastern and western parts of the island,
             and the country and towns. The slaves have
             increased largely in the eastern districts, but the ,
             fearful certainty that, notwithstanding the importa- ‘
             tlon of 185,000 new negroes, the mass of free colored
             and slaves, mulattoes and blacks, had increased only
             64,000, or one-fifth, between 1811 and 1825, exhibits
             clearly that the changes experienced by the relations
             of partial distribution, are reduced to much narrower
             limits than might have been supposed.
                             Supposing the population, as already stated, to be
             715.000   (which I believe to be within tlie minimum
             number), the ratio of population in Cuba, in 1825,
             is 197 individuals to the square league, and, conse-
             quently, nearly twice less than that of St. Domingo,
             and four times smaller than that of Jamaica. If
             Cuba were as well cultivated as the latter island, or,
             more properly speaking, if the density of population
             were* the same, it would contain 3515 x 874 or
             3.159.000   inhabitants;1 that is to say, more than are
               1 Supposing tbe population of Haiti to be 820.000, it is 334 persons
             to the square league, and if we estimate it at 930,000, it is 382,
             Native writers suppose the island of Cuba to be capable of maintain-
             ing seven and two-sevenths millions of inhabitants. (See Remon-
             strance of the Cuban Deputies, against the tariff of 1821, p. 9.) '
                                                               POPULATION.
193
         now contained in the Republic of Colombia, or in all
         the archipelago of the Antilles. Yet Jamaica has
         1,914,000   acres of waste land.
            The most remote official census and statistics that
         I could obtain, during my residence in Havana, are
         those of 1774 and 1775, compiled by order of the
         Marquis de la Torre, and that of 1791, by order of
         Don Luis de las Casas.1 Everyone is aware that
         both these were made with great negligence, and a
         large part of the population was omitted. The cen-
         sus of 1775, which is known as that of the Abbb
         Raynal, gives the following figures:
         Even under this bypothesis, the ratio of population would not be
         equal to that of Ireland.—H.
            1 This governor was the founder of the Patriotic Society, the
         Board of Agriculture and Trade, the Chamber of Commerce, tlie
         Orphan Asylum, the Chair of Mathematics, and several primary
         schools. He iutended to ameliorate the barbarous forma of criminal
         law, and created the noble office of advocate for the poor. The
         improvement and ornament of the city of Havana, the building of
         the highway to Guanajay, the construction of docks, the protection
         afforded to writers for the press, that they might give vigor to pub-
         lic spirit, all date from his time. Don Luis de las Casas y Aragorri,
         captain-general of Cuba (1790-1796), was born in the village of
         Sopuerta, in Biscay ; he fought with great distinction in Portugal, at
         Pensacola, in the Crimea, before Algiers, at Mahon, and at Gibral-
         tar. He died in July, 1800, at Puerto Santa Maria, at the age of 65
         years. See the compendiums of his life by l'riar Juan Gonzalez, and
         by Don Tomas Romay.—H.
                                       9
194:            humboldt’s cuba.
              Male*. Femalcu. 
Whites,       54,555 40,864   
Free colored, 15,980 14,G35   
Slaves,       28,774 15,562   
Total,        99,309 71,001   
              In all, 170,370, of which, the district of Havana
            alone contained 75,607- I cannot answer for the
            correctness of this table, for I have not seen the
            oflicial documents.
              The census of 1791 gave 272,141 inhabitants,, of
            which 137,800 were in the district of Havana, as fol-
            lows : 44.337 in the capital, 27,715 in the other towns
            and villages of the district, and 65,748 in the country
            Partidos. These figures have been compared with the
            registers. A moment’s reflection will demonstrate the
            contradictory nature of these results. The mass of
            137,800 inhabitants in the district of Havana, are stated
            as follows; whites, 73,000, free colored, 27,600,slaves,
            37,200; so that the whites would bear a proportion
            to the slaves of 2 to 1, instead of that of 100 to 83,
            which has loDg since been found to be the relative
            proportions, both in the city and in the country.
              In 1804 I discussed the census of Don Luis de las
            Casas, with persons who possessed great knowledge
            of the locality. Examining the proportions of the
            numbers omitted in the partial comparisons, h.
            seemed to us that the population of the island, io
                                                               POPULATION*
195
      1791, could not have been less than 362,700 souls.
      This has been augmented, during the years between
      1791 and 1804, by the number of African negroes
      imported, which, according to the custom-house
      returns for that period, amounted to 60,393; by the
      immigration from Europe and St. Domingo (5,000);
      and by the excess of births and deaths, which, in
      truth, is indeed small in a country where one-fourth
      or one-fifth of the entire population is condemned to
      live in celibacy. The result of these three causes of
      increase, was estimated at 60,000, estimating an
      annual loss of seven per cent, on the newly
      imported negroes; this gives approximately, for the
      year 1804, a minimum of 432,080 inhabitants.1
        11 estimated this'number for the year 1804, to comprise, whites,
      234,000, free-colored, 90,000, slaves, 180,000. (The census of 1817
      has given, whites, 290,000, free colored, 115,000, and slaves, 225,000).
      I estimated the slave population, graduating the production of
      sugar .at from 80 to 100 arrobes for each negro on the sugar
      plantations, and 82 slaves as the mean population of each planta-
      tion. There were, then, 250 of these. In the seven parishes^
      Guanajay, Managua, Batabano, Guinea, Cano, Bejucal, and Guana-
      bacoa, there were found, by an exact census, 15,130 slaves on 183
      sugar plantations.—(MSS. Documents, p. 134. Representation of the
      Consulado 'of Havana, 10th July, 1799.) It is difficult to ascertain
      correctly, the ratio of the production of sugar to the number of
      negroes employed on the estates, for there are some where barely
      300 negroes produces 30,000 arrobes, while on others, 800 negroes
      produce only 27,000 arrobes yearly. The number of whites can be

196
                          HUMBOLDT5 6 CUBA.
              The census of 1817 gives a population of 572,363,
            and this should be considered only as a minimum,
            corresponding with the results obtained by me, in
            1804, and which have since been cited in many sta-
            tistical works. The returns of tho custom-houses
            alone show that more than 78,500 negroes were
            imported between 1804: and 1816.
              The most valuable documents which we possess
            up to the present time (1825), relative to the
            population of the island, were published on the
            occasion of a celebrated motion made in the Spanish
            Cortes, on the 26th March 1811, by Senores Alcocer
            and Arguelles, against the African slave-trade in
           estimated by Ibe rolls of the militia, of which, in 1804, there were
            2,680 disciplined, and 27,000 rural, notwithstanding the great
            facilities for avoiding the service, and tho innumerable exemptions
            granted to lawyers, physicians, apothecaries, notaries, clergy and
            church servants, schoolmasters, overseers, traders, and all who are
            styled noble. See Reflections of an Ilabanero upon the Indepen-
            dence of the Island, 1823,7). 17. The number of men capable ot
            bearing arms, between the ages of 15 and 60, was estimated, in 1817,
            as follows: 1st free class; whites, 71,047, mulattoes, 17,862, blacks,
            17,246, total, 106,155 ; 2d slaves, 85,899, in all, 192,054. Taking as
            a basis, the estimate of the military enrolment of the population of
            France, (Peuchat stat. p. 243 and 247), we find that the number of
            192,054 corresponds to a population somewhat less than six hundred
            thousand. The quota of the three classes, whites, free colored, and
            slaves, are as 37 : 18 :45; while the relative proportions of the
            population are very nearly 46 : 18 : 36.—H.
                                                              POPULATION.
197
      general and the perpetual continuance of slavery in
      the colonies. These valuable documents are accom-
      panied and sustained by the remonstrance1 which
      Don Francisco de Arango (one of the wisest of
      statesmen, and profoundly versed in everything
      relating to his country), made to the Cortes, in the
      the name of the Ayuntamiento, the Oonsulado, and
      the Patriotic Society of Havana. It is there stated
      that “there is no other general census than that
      which was taken (in 1791), during the wise adminis-
      tration of Don Luiade las Casas, and that since that
      time, some partial ones only have been taken in one
      or other of the most populous districts.”
        From this we learn, that the tables published in
      1811, are founded on incomplete data, and on
      approximate estimates of the increase from 1791 to
      that time. In the following table the division of the
      island into four districts, has been adopted, as fol-
      lows:—1st. The jurisdiction of Havana, or west-
      ern part, between Cape San Antonio and Alvarez.
      2d. The jurisdiction of Cuatro Villas, with its eight
          Representation of 16th August, 1811, which ,was made by the
        Alfercz Mayor of Havana, under direction of the Ayuntamiento,
        Consulado, and Patriotic Society of that city, and laid before tho
        Cortes hy these corporations. This representation, or remonstrance,
        is contained in the Documents relative to the slave-trade, 1814, p.
        1-80.—H.
198
humboldt’s Cuba.
                districts. 3d. The jurisdiction of Puerto Principe,
with seven districts. 4th. The jurisdiction of St.
|;              Jago de Cuba, with fifteen districts. The last three
|k                 comprise the  eastern part  of the island.
lS
                                    Free
                                                         Whites. colored. Slaves. Total.
    Western Pakt :
Havana and Suburbs_____   43,000 27,000   28,000 - 98,000
\\  Country............               15,000 119,000   252,000 
,1                                                             
b                             1G1,000 42,000 147,000   350,000 
i.  Eastern Part :                                             
!;  St. Jago de Cuba .... .... 40,000 38,000 32,000    110,000 
%   Puerto Principe...... .... 38,000 14,000 18,000    70,000  
    Cuatro Villas.....     . . 35,000 20,000 15,000    70,000  
i                             113,000 72,000 65,000    250,000 
r ■                                                            
*>  Totals .........      ... 274,000 114,000 212,000  600,000 
                The peaceful relations of the several castes with
             each other, will always be a political problem of the
             greatest importance, until such time as a wise legis-
             lation, shall succeed in calming their inveterate
             hatred, by conceding an equality of civil rights to
             the oppressed classes. In 1811, the number of I
             whites in the island of Cuba exceeded that of the
             slaves by 62,000, and was only one-fifth less than the
             aggregate of free colored and slaves. The whites in
             the English and French Antilles are nine per cent.,
             while in Cuba they are forty-five per cent, of the i
                                  a
                                                              POPULATION.
199
         total population. The free colol'ed amount to nine-
          teen per cent., which is double their proportion in
          Jamaica or Martinique. As the census of 1817,
          modified by the Provincial Deputation, only exhibits
          115,700 free colored, and 225,000 slaves, the com-
          parison proves—1st, that the free colored have been
          estimated incorrectly both in 1811 and 1817; and
          2d, that the mortality of the negroes is so great that,
          notwithstanding the importation of more than 67,700
          negroes from Africa, according to the custom-house
          returns, there were in 1817 only 13,300 more slaves
          than in 1811.
           The decrees of the Cortes of 3d March, and 26th
          July, 1813, and the necessity of ascertaining the
          population, for the establishment of the electoral
          juntas of the province, the partido, and the parish,
          obliged the government to take a new census in
          1817, which is as follow:
              Census of 1817, cxdusim of transient persons and
              negroes imported during the ymr.
       Districts,
Western Department:
  Havana ......................
  Matanzas.....................
                                                                    Trinidad (with Santi Espiritu,
                                                                    Remedies, and Villa Clara)
  Whites. Free colored. Slaves.
135,177         40,419       112.122
  10,617         1,676         9,594
  51,864
16,411
 14,497
200              humboldt’s Cuba.
Districts.                  Whites. Free colored. Slaves. 
Eastern Department:                                       
Cuba (with Bayamo, Holguin,                               
andBaracoa)............     33,733     60,230      46,500 
Puerto Principe..........   25,989      6,955      16,579 
Total ..............        257,380 115,691       199,292 
                  Ill all............ 572,363.
     Though it may seem strange that the approximate
estimate presented to the Cortes in 1811, shows a
total population 28,000 greater than the actual cen-
sus of 1817, this contradiction is only apparent.
This census is doubtless less imperfect than that of
1791, yet it does not comprise all the population,
because of the fear everywhere inspired in the peo-
ple, by an operation which is always supposed by
them to be not only direful, but the precursor of
new taxation. On the other hand, the Provincial
Deputation thought proper to make two modifications
in the census of 1817, when sending it to Madrid:
1st, adding 32,641 whites (transient traders and
crews of vessels), whose business call them to Cuba;
and 2d, adding 25,967 African negroes imported
during the year 1817. By these additions the Pro-
vincial Deputation obtained a total population of
630,980, of which 290,021 were whites, 115,691 free
colored, and 225,261 slaves.1
  1 So far as my opinion goes, I believe that in 1825 there were
POPULATION.
                                   201 '
   Wo shall not be surprised at the partial contradic-
tious found in the tables of population in America,
when wo take into consideration all the difficulties
that have been encountered in the centres of Euro-
pean civilization, England and France, whenever the
great operation of a general census is attempted.
No one is ignorant, for example, of the fact, that the
population of Paris, in 1820, was 114,000, and from
the number of deaths, and supposed proportion of
births to the total population, it is believed to have
been 520,000, at the beginning of the eighteenth
century; yet, during the administration of Mon.
Neckar, the ascertained population was one-sixtli
less than this number. It is known, that, from 1801
to 1821, the population of England and Wales
increased 3,104,683, yet the registers of births and
deaths show an increase of only 2,173,416; and it is
impossible to attribute the difference of 931,267 to
immigration from Ireland. These examples do not
prove that we should distrust the calculations of
 nearly 325,000 whites, and one the best informed gentlemen of
Havana, who was well acquainted with the country, estimated them,
in 1823, at 340,000. (See On Independence of Cuba, p. 17.) In
some parts of the island statistical tables have been formed with
great care ; in San Juan de los Remedios, and Filipinas, for exam-
ple, particularly those made by Don Joaquin Vigil y Quinones and
Don Jos6 Aguilar, in 1819,—H.
                                         9*
 202              humboldt’s  cuba.
 political economy; what .they do prove is, that we
should not employ numerical elements, without
having first examined them, and ascertained the
extent of their errors. One is tempted to compare
the different degrees of probability presented by
statistical tables in the Ottoman Empire, in Spanish
and Portuguese America, in France or Prussia, by
geographical positions based on the eclipses of the
moon, on its distance from the sun, or on occultations .
of the stars.
   In order to adapt a census made twenty years
since, to any other given time, we must ascertain the
rate of increase; but this can be ascertained only
from the enumerations of 1791, 1810, and 1817,
taken in the eastern part of the island, which is the
least populous portion. When comparisons rest
upon too small masses, existing under the influence
of particular circumstances (as in seaports or in the
sugar planting districts), they cannot give the nume-
rical results proper to be used as a basis for the
entire country.
   It is generally supposed that the whites increase
more rapidly in the villages and haciendas than in
the towns; that the free colored, who prefer a
make-shift residence in the towns to the labors
of agriculture, multiply with greater rapidity than
all the other classes; and that the slaves, among
                                                              POPULATION.
203'
 whom, unfortunately, there are only one-third of tho
females required by the number of males,1 decrease
more than eight per cent., annually.
   We have already seen2 that in Havana and sub-
urbs, the whites increased 73 per cent., and the free
colored 171 per cent., in twenty years. Through
nearly all the eastern part of the island, the same
classes have nearly doubled in the same time. We
will here mention that the free colored multiply, in
part, through the transition from one class to the
other, and the slaves increase through the activity
of the slave-trade. At the present time, the whites
receive but little increase through immigration from
Europe, the Canary Islands, the Antilles, or the Con-
tinent; this class multiplies within itself, for patents
of white   Mood are seldom granted by the tribunals to
 persons of light yellow color.
   According to the census of 1775, the district of
Havana, comprising six cities (the capital, Trinidad,
San Felipe y Santiago, Santa Maria del Rosario,
Jaruco, and Matanzas), six towns (Guanabacoa, Santi
Espiritu, Villa Clara, San Antonio, San Juan de los
Remedios, and Santiago), and thirty villages and
hamlets, contained a population of 171,626; and in
   1 This applies only to those slaves employed on the sugar planta-
tions.
   5 Chapter I., p. 114.
204
 iiumboldt’s ouba.
 1806, with greater exactitude, 277,364. (Patriota
Americano, vol. ii., p. 300.) Consequently, the
increase, in thirty-one years, had been only sixty-
one per cent.; but if we could compare the latter
half of this term, it would show a much more rapid
increase. In fact, the census of 1817 gives a popu-
lation of 392,377, which shows an increase of forty-
one per cent., in eleven years, for the same extent
of country, then called the Province of Havana,
comprising the districts of the capital, Matanzas,
and Trinidad, or Cuatro Villas.
  . We must remember, while comparing the results
of the censuses of 1791 and 1810 of the capital and
of the eastern province, that we obtain an excessive
rate of increase, for there were many more omissions
in the first than in the second census. By comparing
those most recently taken in the eastern province, in
1810 and 1817, I believe we approach nearer the
truth. These are as follows:
                  Whites. Free Col’d. Slaves. Total.
      1810         35,513  32,884  38,834   107,231
      1817........33,733   50,230  40,500   130,403
  Increase in six years 23,232, or more than twenty-
one per cent.; and there is probably an error in the
second statement of the number of whites, in the
last census. The proportion of whites and free
colored is very great in the district of Cuatro Villas,
                                                               POPULATION.
205
 where, in the six partidos of San Juan de los Keme-
dios, San Augustin, San Anastasio de Cupey, San
Felipe, Santa F6, and Sagua la Chica, there were, in
1819, in an area of 24,651       , a total popula-
 tion of 13,722, of which 9,572 were whites, 2,000
free colored, and 2,140 slaves; while, on the con-
trary, in the ten partidos of the Filipinas district, in
the same year, in a population of 13,026, there were
5,871 whites, 3,521 free colored, and 3,634 slaves.
The proportion of free colored to white was as 1 to 1.7.
  [Note.—Since the publication of tho foregoing
admirable analysis by Baron Humboldt, of the pop-
ulation of Cuba, censuses have been taken in the
years 1827,1841, and 1846, which are as follows:
CENSUS OF 1821.
 Whitoi.                Free Colored,              Slaves,            Total.
                                                       --s               
Department. Male.     Female.  Male. Fomale.   Male.   Fomale.           
Western,..  , 89,526  75,582  21,285 24,829    125,888 72,027  408,537   
Central,..  . 58,447  44,776  18,296 10,950    28,898  13,630  164,497   
Eastern, .. , 25,680  22,090  17,431 18,753    29,504  17,995  181,453   
Total,...   , 168,658 142,898 51,902 54,532    188,290 108,052 704,486   
                              CENSUS OF 1841.                            
Western,..  185,079   108,944 82,726 83,737    207,954 118,820 681,760   
Central,..  . 60,085  58,888  15,525 16,054    84,939  15,217  195,608   
Eastern, .. , 82,080  28,865  27,452 27,844    88,357  26,708  180,250   
Total,...   227,114   191,147 75,708 77,135    281,250 155,245 1,007,624 
206
                           humboldt’s ou?a.
CENSUS OF JS40.
                Whites,      Free Colored.     Slaves.      Total.  
Department. Male.    Female, Male.  Female. Mule.   Female.         
"Western,.. 183,908  110,141 28,964 32,730  140,131 87,082  533,616 
Central,..  . 02,202 52,092  17,041 17,074  82,425  14,500  190,054 
Eastern, .. 84,758   81,951  26,640 20,771  28,455  20,500  109,082 
Total....   230,988  194,784 72,651 76,575  201,011 122,748 89S,752 
   The slightest examination leads to the belief that
there is some error in the figures of the census of
1846; and we are inclined to doubt its results, for
the following reasons:
   1st. During the period between 1841 and 1846, no
great cause, as epidemic, or emigration on a large
scale, existed to check the hitherto steady increase
of the slave population, and cause a decrease of
112,736 in its numbers, being nearly twenty six
per cent, of the returns of 1841; which apparent
decrease, and the annihilation of former rate of
increase (3.7 per cent., yearly), amount together to
a loss of 47 per cent., in six years.
   2d. During this period, the material prosperity of
the country experienced no decrease, except the loss
of part of one crop, consequent upon the hurricane
of 1845.
   3d. During the period from 1842 to 1846, the
church returns of christenings and interments were
as follows:
POPULATION.
                                                                  20 r
               Whites. Colored. Total.   
Christenings,.. 87,047 74,302   161,3tt9 
 Interments,.. .61,45G 57,7G2   109,218  
  Increase, .. .35,591 16,540   52,131   
   4th. And because, that, in addition to the reasons
adduced by Baron Humboldt, for less returns by the
people than their actual numbers, that the taking of
a census “is always supposed by them to be not
only direful, but the precursor of new taxationa
capitation tax upon house servants was imposed in
1844, and a very general fear existed that it would
he extended to other classes.
   When the writer first went to Cuba, in 1834, lie
was strongly impressed with the popular supposition
there, that the slave population diminished fully
eight per cent, annually, by death, and that this loss
was only partially compensated (about three per
cent.), by the importation of negroes from Africa,
which, at that time was not supposed to reach
twelve thousand a year. At this period, the mean
annual export of sugar was 550,000 boxes, and of
coffee, 330,000 bags (the two great staples), and the
mean annual value of imports was $17,000,000, and
of exports, $14,000,000, according to the official
valuations. During the seventeen years of our
residence there, the annual export of sugar steadily
increased until it exceeded 1,500,000 boxes; that of
208
 JIUMBOBDt’s CUBA.
 coffee fell to 125,000 bags, and the value of imports
and exports reached $20,750,000 and $27,450,000 res-
pectively.
    Admitting as correct the supposed annual loss
of five per cent, to the slave or laboring popu-
lation, the producing class must have diminished
eighty-five per cent, from 1835 to 1852, a supposi-
tion directly at variance with the results exhibited
by the commerce of the island. So far as our
limited individual observation extended, we arrived
at the conclusion that this supposition of loss arose
from the fact that the greater part of capital and
scientific knowledge in Cuba is absorbed in the
sugar culture, and that the estimates regarding
population were based, in a great measure, on data
derived from this claBS and branch of labor. Its
great preponderance in the foreign commerce of the
island, overshadowed its true relation to the general
economy of the country. We believe that the slave
population of Cuba does not decrease in the towns,
nor on the coffee estates, tobacco plantations, grazing
farms, and numerous minor branches of agriculture,
but that on the contrary* it increases in all these,
and more than compensates for the loss on the sugar
plantations. The supposed former rate of loss has
been greatly diminished during the last twenty
years, by the improvements in the system of con-
                                                               POPULATION.
209
 ducting the sugar plantations, and a greater equaliza-
tion of sexes upon them. In no other way can we
account for the rapid increase in the material pros-
perity of Cuba, an increase that is only surpassed by
that of our own United States.
   In estimating, therefore, the present population of
JUuba, we shall adopt the rate of increase exhibited
by the two censuses of 1827 and 1841. The first may
be considered the minimum of population at that
time, it being less than the well-reasoned estimate
of Baron Humboldt for the year 1825: and although
the second was perhaps taken with greater care, we
know of no reason why it should not be held also as
the minimum expression of the population. It was,
at the time of publication, charged by well-informed
writers, with understating numbers.
   The annual rate per cent, of increase in the several
classes of population, as indicated by the various
censuses, is somewhat fluctuating, and is as follows:
 White. Free colored. Slaves.
1774 to 1792,.  ...2.7 4,2  5   
1792 “ 1817,..  ...3.1 4.4  5.4 
181,7 “ 1827,.. ...2.1 0.68 4.4 
1827 “ 1841,..  .. 2.5 3.1  3.7 
   The latter rate of increase would give to Cuba, at
the close of the year 1855,
210
humboldt’s cuba.
Whites,.... .564,083, being 39 per cent.
Free colored,.219,170, “ 15 “     “
Slaves,.....662,599, “ 46 “ “
Total,.... 1,440,462
   This does not seem excessive, when we take into
consideration her vast consumption of foreign p10
ducts, and the great value of the staples she p°u1^
into the lap of commerce.]
                                                               SLAVERY.
211
                         CHAPTER VI.
                              SLAVERY.
Manumission frequent in Cuba—Its causes—Slaves allowed to hire
  their time. [Note—Usual wages—Number of working days—
  Slaves may purchase their freedom by partial payments—Many
  remain partially redeemed — Reason — Curious phase of negro
  mind.] Position of free negroes—Mild laws—Slaves previous to
  the Eighteenth century—Religious scruples regarding females—
  Population of Sugar plantations—Projects . for increasing slaves
  —Don Francisco de Arango—Desire to ameliorate their condition
  —First importation—Entire importation to America in sixteenth
  century—Slaves in Cuba in 17 G 3—Activity of trade at the close
  of the eighteenth century—Treaty with England. [Note—Total
  number imported.] Compared with Jamaica — Other English
  colonies (note)—Humane result in Cuba—Mortality of slaves—
  Has diminished—Of newly imported negroes—Means to prevent
  decrease—Abolition of slave-trade. [Note—Not effective—Baron
  Humboldt's sketch of slavery in Cuba—Decrease of slaves a fal-
  lacy-increase only paralleled in United States—Their wellbeing
  evident—Chinese imported—Injurious influence and evil results.
  In no part of the world, where slavery exists, is
manumission so frequent as in the island of Cuba;
for Spanish legislation, directly the reverse of French
and English, favors in an extraordinary degree the
212
 humboldt’s ouba.
 attainment of freedom, placing no obstacle in its
way, nor making it in any manner onerous. The
riglit which every slave has of seeking a new mas-
ter, or purchasing his liberty, if he can pay the
amount of his cost; the religious sentiment that in-
duces many persons in good circumstances to con-
cede by will freedom to a certain number of negroes;
the custom of retaining a number of both sexes for
domestic service, and the affections that necessarily
arise from this familiar intercourse with the whites;
and the facilities allowed to slave-workmen to labor
for their own account, by paying a certain stipulated
sum to their masters, are the principal causes why
so many blacks acquire their freedom in the towns.1
   1 The customary rate of hire is ten cents on each $100 of
the value of the slave for every working-day. There are about
two hundred and ninety working-days in the year, Sundays and
church holidays being considered days of rest. In addition to the
above-mentioned facilities for attaining freedom, the slave has the
privilege of paying his master small sums of money on account, and
thus becoming a codwncr of himself. Thus, if his value be $000,
by paying his master $25 he becomes the owner of one twenty-
fourth of himself; when he has paid $50, he owns one-twelfth, and
so on ; and in hiring his time, he pays to his master rent only on the
sum remaining due. The law obliges the master to accept these
partial payments ; and should the owner over-value the slave at the
time of commencing them, the negro can appeal to the syndic, who
is annually appointed to protect the slaves. A slave who has par-
tially manumitted himself is styled coartado. Many redeem them-
                                                                  SLAVERY.
213
    The position of the free negroes in Cuba is much
better than it is elsewhere, even among those nations
which have for ages flattered themselves as being
most advanced in civilization. We find there no
such barbarous laws as have been invoked, even in
our own days, by which free negroes are prohibited
from receiving donations from the whites, and can be
deprived of their liberty, and sold for the benefit of
the State, should they be convicted of affording an
asylum to escaped slaves.1
    Until the closing years of the eighteenth century,
the number of slaves on the sugar plantations in Cuba
was extremely small, and what most surprises us is,
that a prejudice founded on “ religious scruples,” op-
posed the introduction there of females (they costing
in Havana one-third less than males), thus forcing
 selves excepting the sum of $50 or $100; and on this pay a rent to
the roaster for the rest of their lives, no matter how much wealth
they may acquire. A careful study of individual reasons, among
the blacks in Cuba, for adopting this course, might perhaps develop
some unobserved peculiarities of the negro mind. It may sometimes
arise from ties of affection, sometimes from interests, aud it may be
found to result, in some cases, from an intuitive desire, or an idiosyn-
crasy on the part of the negro to have some immediate and tangible
superior, to whose opinion he can look with respect, aiul from whom
he can claim protection in calamity.
  1 Decision of the Supreme Council of Martinique of 1th July,
1720.—“ Decree of 1st March, 1766, § 7.—II.
214
 humboldt’s Cuba.
 the slaves to celibacy, under the pretext that vicious
habits were thus avoided. The Jesuits and the
Bethlemite friars, being superior to this sad prejudice,
were the only planters that allowed them on their
plantations. Although the census of 1775, which is
undoubtedly very imperfect, gave 15,562 female and
29,336 male slaves, we must bear in mind that this
census embraced the whole island, while the sugar
plantations, even at the present time (1825), do not
contain more than one-fourth of the entire slave
population.1
   From the year 1795, the Consulado of Havana
   1 The “ Cuadro Estadistico ” of 184G presents some partial in-
formation on this point, which is interesting. It states the number
of sugar plantations in the several departments of the island and
their population, as follows:—
                     Plantations. Population, Average. 
Western .......  ............ 735   96,462         181 
Central ........                    28,763          59 
Eastern .......                   \ 10,586          85 
                 1442               130,816            
   These numbers are undoubtedly under-stated ; but estimating an
average of ten per cent, as the white population of the sugar plan-
tations, we have a slave population of 116,735, being nearly 18 per
cent., engaged in the culture of sugar. It is to be regretted that the
“ Cuadrodoes not state the relative numbers of males and females;
but well-informed persons think the sugar plantations have now one-
third females.
                                                                  SLAVERY.
215
 have seriously entertained projects for increasing the
slave population, independent of the fluctuations of
the slave-trade. Don Francisco de Arango, whose
labors have always been pure and judicious, pro-
posed the imposition of a tax upon those plantations
which did not contain one-third females among their
slaves. lie also proposed the imposition of a duty
of six dollars upon each male negro imported from
Africa. Although these measures were not adopted,
for the colonial juntas always refused to adopt coer-
cive measures, yet, from that time, there has arisen a
desire to increase the number of marriages, and to
take better care of the children of the slaves; and a
royal order (22 April, 1804) recommends this policy
to “the sense of right, and the humanity of the
colonists.”
   The census of 1817 gave, according to Poinsett,
60,322 female, and 106,521 male slaves. In 1771,
the proportion of female to male slaves was 1 to 1.9;
so that, in forty years, it had altered very slightly, it
being, in 1817, 1 to 1.7. The small amount of this
change must bo attributed to the large number of
African negroes imported subsequently to 1791, and
to the fact that the importation of females lias been
large, only during the years between 1S17 and 1820;
the slaves retained as servants in the cities are only •
a small fraction of the total number. In the district
of Batabano, which contained in 1818 a population
216
Humboldt’s Cuba.
  of 2,078, with 13 sugar, ami 7 coffee estates, there
  were 2,226 male, and 257 female slaves; proportion,
  8 to 1. In San Juan de los Kemedios, containing, in
  1817, a population of 13,700, with 17 sugar, and 73
  coffee estates, there were 1,200 male and 660 female
  slaves; proportion, 10 to 1.’ In the district of Feli-
  pinas, having in 1819 a population of 13,026, there
  were 2,494 male, and 997 female slaves; proportion,
  2.4 to 1.. In all the island, the males are to the
  females as 1.7 to 1; on the sugar estates alone, they
  are barely 4 to 1.
    The first introduction of negroes (in the eastern
  part of the island), occurred in 1521. At that time,
  the Spaniards were much less desirous than the Por-
  tuguese of possessing slaves; for, in 1539, twelve
  thousand negroes were sold in the city of Lisbon.
  The trade in slaves was not free in the sixteenth cen-
  tury, licenses for it being granted by the govern- •
  ment; and, in 1586, Gaspar Peralta purchased the
  monopoly for the whole of Spanish America. In
  1595, it was sold to Gomez Kaynal; and again, in
  1615, to Antonio Eodriguez de Elvas.
   The entire American importation then did not
exceed 3,500, yearly; and the people of Cuba, occu-
pied exclusively in raising cattle, received very few.
During the war of the succession, the French traders
                                           ' Thus in the original.
                                                                 SLAVERY.
217
 visited Havana, exchanging slaves for tobacco. The
possession of the island by the English stimulated
somewhat the importation of negroes; yet, in 1763,
although the capture of Havana, and the presence
of foreigners, created new wants, the number of
slaves did not exceed 25,000 in that district, and
32,000 in the whole island.
   The number of Africans imported from 1521 to
1763, was probably 60,000, whose descendants exist
among the free mulattoes, the greater part of which
inhabit the eastern part of the island. From 1763 to
1790, when the trade in negroes was thrown open,
Havana received 24,875 (by the Tobacco Company
4,957 from 1763 to 1766; by the contract with the
Marquis de Casa Enrile, 14,132, from 1773 to 1779 •
by the contract with Baker and Dawson, 5,786, from
1786 to 1789). If we estimate the importation of
slaves in the eastern part of the island, during these
twenty-seven years (1763 to 1790), at 6,000, we have
a total importation of 90,875 from the time of the
discovery of Cuba, or more properly speaking, from
1521 to 1790.
   The activity of the slave-trade in the fifteen years
following 1790, was so great, that more slaves were
bought and sold in that time, than in the two and a
half centuries that preceded its being thrown open.
This activity was redoubled when England stipulated
                                      10
218
humboldt's cuba.
with Spain, that the trade should be suppressed
north of the equator from the 22d November, 1817,
and totally abolished on the 30th May 1820. The
King of Spain accepted from England (a fact which
posterity will hardly believe), the sum of four hun-
dred thousand pounds sterling, in compensation for
the damages and loss which might arise from the
cessation of this barbarous traffic.
  The following statement exhibits the number of
African negroes imported in Havana alone, according
to the custom-house returns.
1790.  ...2,534            1806. .. .4,395 
1791.  .. 8,498            1807. ...2,565  
1792.  ...8,528             1808 ... 1,607 
1793.                      1809. ...1,162  
1794.  . ♦ .4,164          1810. ...6,672  
1795.  ...5,832            1811. ...6,349  
1796.  ...5,711           1812.. ...6,081  
1797., ,..4,552           1813.. ...4,770  
1798.. ..2,001            1814.. ..4,321   
1799 . ..4,919            1815.,           
1800.. ..4,145            1816.. .17,737   
1801.. ..1,659            18171. . 25,841  
1802.. .13,832            1818.. .19,902   
1803.. ..9,671         1819..    .17,194 ( 
1804.. ..8,923         1820..    . i 4,122 
1805.. ..4,999         - ■                 
Total, in 31 years,..  ..225,574           
   1 Ollier MS. notes in my possession state the number for 1817, at •
28.560 slaves.—H.                                                   ♦ \
                                                                 SLAVERY.
219
   The mean annual number during this interval is
7,470, and 11,542 for the last ten years. This should
be increased at least one-fonrtli, partly, because of
the illicit importations, and omissions in the returns,
and partly for the licit importations at Trinidad
and St. Jago; so that we have for the whole island,
                     From 1521 to 1763.. ...60,000  
                          “ 1764 “1790.. .. .33,109 
In Havana alone,                                    
                    From 1791 to 1805... ,. .91,211 
                         “ 1806 “1820... ..131,829  
                                         316,119    
                 Increase by the illicit trade and  
                by the importations in the eastern  
part of the island, from 1791 to 1820,.. ...66,000  
                                         372,419    
   [Note.—In order to present in one continuous
view the number of negroes carried to Cuba up to
the latest returns accessible to us, we continue here
the calculation by Baron Humboldt. From the
reports of the British commissioners at Havana, we
learn the following particulars, in relation to the
trade subsequently to its suppression in 1820, by the
treaty with England.
   In 1821, twenty-six vessels, arrived, bringing 6,415.
slaves ; and Mr. Jameson, one of the commissioners,
states that to this amount one-half should bo added
for importations not ascertained by the ..commis-
220
                               iiumbolbt’s cuba.
sioners, and that he estimates the slaves imported
during that year at 10,000.
   The yearly reports of the commissioners give the
following figures, up to 1828 :
       1822.,.......... 10 vessels  an’ived—estimated, 3,000
       1823    ......... 4    “        “         “      1,200
       1824    .......  17    «        «         «      5,100
       1825    ........ 14   «*        “         “      4?200
       1826    ........ 11    «        «         «     *3,000
       1827   ......... 10    “        “         «     *3,500
       1828   ......... 28    “        “         “     *7,000
                                                       27,000
      Add Mr. Jameson’s estimate of one-half,. 13,500
      Making a total of...................... 40,500-
   A report of the British consul at Havana, to tho
foreign office in London, gives the following state-
ment of slaves imported into Cuba from 1829 to
1838; to which, lie estimates, one-fifth should be
added for non-ascertained importations:
1829....... ,... 8,600 1834.......        ... 11,400 
1830.......      9,800 1835.......       ,... 14,800 
1831......     ,10,100 1836.......        ... 14,200 
1832....... .... 8,200 1837_______        ... 15,200 
                 9,000                               
                       Total,..........   .. 101,600 
                       Add one-fifth,...   .. 20,320 
                                             121,920 
   * These numbers are given by the commissioners, in their reports I
for the other years, the number of vessels arriving only is stated.
                                                                 SLAVERY.
221
  The importations from 1838 to 1853, according to
the returns laid before the British House of Com-
mons, were as follows:
1838...... .... 10,495  1846.....                     
1839...... .... 10,995  1847.....         ..... 1,450 
1840...... _____ 10,104 1848 ....                     
1841...... ..... 8,893  1849.....                     
1842.....  . . 3,630    1850.....         ..... 3,500 
1843...... ..... 8,000  1851 ....         ..... 5,000 
1844______     . 10,000 1852.....         ..... 7,924 
1845...... .... 1,300   30 June, ’53.....      99,239 
   We may, therefore, estimate the total number of
negroes imported into Cuba from the coast of Africa,
as follows:
     To 1820 according to Baron Humboldt, .... 372,449
         1821     “     “   Mr. JamesoD, ........ 10,000
         1822 to 1828 .........................   40,500
         1829  to 1837 ......................... 121,920
         1838 to 30 June, 1853................... 99,239
                                                 644,108]1
   1 While these pages were going through the press, we received
from the British Foreign Office, through the kind attention of Hon.
John Appleton, secretary to the legation of the United States at
London, a copy of a parliamentary return to the British House of
Commons, ordered to be printed on the 11th of April 1845, accord-
ing to which, the importations of slaves in Spanish territory in
222
 humboldt’s cuba.
     We have seen that Jamaica has received from
Africa,1 during these three centuries, 850,000 ne-
groes; and, according to a more exact statement,
nearly 677,000 in the one hundred and eight yearn,
from 1700 to 1808, and yet that island contains now
but 380,000 blacks and mulattoes, free and slave.
The island of Cuba presents a more humane result,
 America (Cuba and Porto Rico, the number for the latter being very
 small), from 1821 to 1843 inclusive, amounted to... 75,653
     If to this number we add importations to 1820,
        according to Baron Humboldt,................ 372,449
     1844 to June 30, 1853, as above,................ 47,122
     Wo have a total of............................. 495,224
   This number fs largely exceeded by the estimate we have given
above. The several parliamentary returns before us do not agree
with each other, nor with the reports of the British commissioners at
Havana. With the exception of those for the term from 1832 to
1837, our figures have been obtained from the aunual reports of the
Havana commissioners to the British government, and represent the
maximum of slave importations in Cuba. Through the same polite •
attentions, we learn that the number of slaves illegally imported
into Cuba, during the years 1853 and 1854, has been 12,500, and
10,230, respectively.
   1 All the English colonies in the Antilles, which at the present
time contain only about 700,000 blacks and mulattoes, free and
slave, have received, in one hundred and six years, from 1680 to
1786, as is shown by the custom-house returns, 2*130,000 negroes
from the coast of Africa.—H.

                         SLAVERY.                      223
                                         '~s             »
 for it contains 130,000 free colored, while Jamaica
has only 35,000, with a population of one-half
greater. Cuba has received from Africa,
            Previous to 1791 ........... 93,500
            From 1791 to 1825, at. least_ 320,000
                                         413,500
    In 1825, in consequence of the small number of
females brought by the traders, there existed in the
island only,
            Negroes, free and slave ....... 320,000
            Mulattoes.................... 70,000
                                         390,000
    A similar calculation was sent to the Cortes of
Spain, on the 20 July 1811, based upon numerical
elements differing slightly from these, in which it
was endeavored to prove that the island of Cuba had
received up to 181.0, less than 229,000 African
negroes,1 which are represented, in 1811, by a slave
    1 According to a note published by the Consulado of Havana
(Papal Pcriodico, 1801, p. 12), it is estimated that the average cost
of the 15,64:7 African negroes, imported from 1797 to 1800, was
$375, each. At this rate, the 307,000 imported from 1790 to
1823, will have cost the inhabitants of the island the sum of
. $115,125,000.—II.
224
humboldt’s cub a.
    and free population of blacks and inulattoes, amount-
ing to 326,000; being an excess of 97,000 over the
number imported.1 When it is remembered that the
whites have contributed to the existence of 70,000
mulattoes,2 leaving aside the natural increase that
has resulted from so many thousand negroes pro-
gressively imported, one exclaims, “What other
nation, or human society, can give so favorable an
    1 My calculation closes with 1825, and the number of negroes
imported since the conquest amounts to 413,500. The calculation
sent to the Cortes closes with 1810, and gives 229,000. (Documen-
tos, p’ 119.) Difference, 184,500; but, according to the returns of
the Havana custom-house alone, the number of African negroes
brought to that port from 1811 to 1820, has been 109,000, and to
this we must add, 1st, according to the principles admitted by the
consulado, one-fourth or 27,000, for the licit importations at other
ports of the island ; and, 2d, the amount of illicit traffic, from 1811
to 1825.—H.
                            a The work undertaken by the consulado, in 1811, relative to the
                            probable distribution of 326,000 blacks, free and slave, contains
                            some, very interesting matter, which great local knowledge alone
                            could have supplied to that body. A, Cities. Western part.—In
                            .Havana, 27,000 free colored, and 28,000 slaves; seven towns, with
                            Ayuntamiento, 18,000; from which we have, in the jurisdiction of
                            Havana, 36,000 free colored, and 37,000 slaves. Eastern part,
  80,000 free colored, and 32,000 slaves. Total, in the cities, 72,000
free colored, and 69,000 slaves, or 141,000. B. Country.—Jurisdic-
tion of Havana, 6,000 free colored, and 110,000 slaves. Eastern
part, 36,000 free colorod, and 33,000 slaves. Total, in the country,
185,000.—Doeumcntos sobre los negros, p. 121.—H.
                                                                 SLAVEKY.
225
 account of the results of this unfortunate trade!"
I respect the sentiments that have dictated these
lines, and will again repeat, that if we compare.
Cuba with Jamaica, the results appear, in favor of
the Spanish legislation, and the customs of the inha-
bitants of Cuba. These comparisons demonstrate a
state of affairs in the latter island infinitely more
favorable to the physical preservation and manumis-
sion of the negroes; but what a sorrowful spectacle
is presented by Christian and civilized nations dis-
puting which of the two, in three centuries, has
destroyed the least number of Africans, by reducing
them to slavery I
   I will not praise the treatment of the negroes in
the southern portion of the United States,1 but
certain it is, that different degrees exist in the
sufferings of the human species. The slave who has
a cabin and a family, is not so unhappy as he who is
folded as if he were one of a flock of sheep. The
greater the number of slaves established with their
  1 See “Negro slavery in the United States of America and
Jamaica,” 1823, p. 31, as to the comparative state of misery
between the slaves of the Antilles, and those of the United States.
In 1823 Jamaica had 170,46C males, and 171,916 females; the
United States, in 1820, had 788,020 males, and 750,100 females. It
is not, therefore, the disproportion between the sexes that causes the
absence of natural increase in the Antilles.—H.
                                          10*
226
 Humboldt's cuba.
 families, in cabins which they deem their own, the
more rapid is their multiplication. The slaves in the
United States were as follows:—
           1770.. .. 480,000          1810.... 1,191,304
           1791.. . 676,096           1820... .1,641,568
           1800.. .. 894,444
   The annual increase1 for the last ten years, has
been (without counting the manumission of 100,000),
20,000, which is doubling in 27 years. I will say,
therefore, with Mr. Cropper,11 that if the slaves in
Jamaica and Cuba had multiplied in the same
proportion,8 these two islands would have had, one
   JThe increase of the slaves from 1790 to 1810 (514,608), arises as
follows:—1st The natural increase in the families; 2d. The 1
importation of 30,000 negroes, between 1804 and 1808, which was,
unhappily, permitted by the Legislature of South Carolina ; 3d. The
acquisition of Louisiana, where there were 30,000 negroes. The
increase from the last two causes has been only £ of the total
increase, and has been compensated by the manumission of more
than \00,000 negroes, who. in 1810, ceased to appoar in the slave
returns. The slaves multiply somewhat less rapidly (the exact
proportion being 0.02611 to 0.02915), than the total population of
the United States; but their multiplication is more rapid than that
of the whites, wherever they form a considerable portion of t&e
population, as in the southern states. (Morse’s Mod. Geogr. 1822,
p. 608.)—H.
   a Letter addressed to the Liverpool Society, 1823, p. 18.—IT.
   “The number of 480,000, in the year 1770, is not based upon an
actual census, it being only an approximate estimate. Albert
                                                                  SLAVERY.
227
 in 1795, and the other in 1800, very nearly then-
present population, without any necessity of loading
400,000 negroes with chains, in Africa, and dragging
them to Port Royal or Havana.
   The mortality of the negroes varies greatly in
Cuba, according to the kind of labor, the humanity
of the masters or overseers, and the number of
women employed in taking care of the sick. I have
 Gallatin thinks that the United States, which, at the close of 1823,
had a population of 1,665,000 slaves, and 250,000 free colored, being
a total of 1,915,000 blacks and mulattocs, never received from the
coast of Africa over 300,000 negroes, that is to say, 1,183,000 less
than those received from 1680 to 1786, by the English Antilles, the
black and mulatto population of which, now barely exceeds one-third
part of that of the United States.—H.
   Air. Carey, of Pennsylvania, in his work on the slave-trade, says,
“the trade in negro slaves to the American colonies was too small
to attract attention.” After a close argument from the ratio of
increase since the first census, Air. C. is enabled to recur back, and
compute the population at earlier periods, separating the native
born from importations. Setting out with the fact that the slaves
(blacks), numbered 55,850 in 1714, ho finds that there were brought,
 of these,
                 From Africa,..............................30,000
                 Importation from 1T15 to 1750.............90,000
            *         “         «   1751 “ 1760............85,000
                      “        **     1701 “ mo............74,000
                      «         «   1771 u 1790............34,000
                      “         «   1790 “ 1808............70,000
                      Total number imported,..............338,000
 Cfompend. of Census of UStates, 1850, p. 83, note.
228
humboldt’s cuba.
   heard discussed with the greatest coolness, the
question whether it was better for the proprietor not
to overwork his slaves, and consequently have to
replace them with less frequency, or whether he
should get all he could out of them in a few years,
and thus have to purchase newly imported Africans
more frequently. But these are the reasonings of
avarice when one man holds another in servitude.
    It would be unjust to deny that the mortality of
the blacks has diminished greatly in Cuba, within
the last fifteen years. Many proprietors have
studied how they might best improve the rules of
their plantations. The mean mortality of the newly
imported negroes is still from ten to twelve per
cent.,1 and from observations made on several well
conducted sugar plantations, it may fall to even six
or eight per cent. This loss among the newly
imported negroes varies much according to the time
of their arrival; the most favorable season for them
is frotn October until January, those being the most
healthy months, and most abundant in provisions 'on
   MVe are assured that in Martinique, where there are 78,000
slaves, the mean mortality is 6,000, while rhe births are barely 1,290,
yearly. Before the cessation of the slave-trade, Jamaica lost
annually, 7,000, or 2£ per cent.; since that time, the diminution of
the population is scarcely perceptible.—Review of the Registry Lawn
by the Com, of the Afric. Inst, 1820, p. 43.—H.
SLAVERY.
229
 the plantations. In the hot months, the mortality
during the sale is sometimes four per cent., as was
the case in 1802.
   An increase in the number of female slaves, so
useful in the care of their husbands and their sick
companions; their relief from labor during preg-
nancy ; greater attention to their children; the estab-
lishment of the slaves by families in separate cabins;
an abundance of food; an increase in the number of
days of rest; and the introduction of a system of
moderate labor for their own account, are the most
powerful and the only means to prevent the diminu-
tion in numbers of the blacks. Some persons who
are well informed as to the old system on the plan-
tations, believe that in the present state of things,
the number of slaves would diminish five pei1 cent,
annually if the contraband traffic should entirely
cease. This diminution is nearly equal to that of
the English Lesser Antilles, except Santa Lucia and
Granada. These last, forewarned by the discussions
in Parliament, took measures to increase the import-
ation -of females. The abolition of the African slave-
trade in Cuba has been more prompt and more
unexpected
   [Note.-—The illustrious author’s anticipations in
regard to the cessation of the African slave-trade in

230
iiumboldt’s cuba.
 Cuba, have not been realized; it being matter of
public notoriety that it is still carried on there on a
large scale, with the connivance of the government,
and in flagrant opposition to the known wishes of
the great majority of the Cubans. His sketch of
slavery, as it exists in that island, is worthy the
careful attention of men of every opinion regarding
the institution itself. We have spoken elsewhere1
of what we deem the fallacy of the decrease of the
slaves in Cuba by death; but a conclusive argu-
ment on this point is presented in the fact that while,
by a liberal computation, there have been imported
into Cuba 614,108 Africans, there are now in that
island 662,599 slaves, and 219,170 free blacks,
making a total of 881,769 Africans and their de-
scendants, while in all the English Antilles an
importation of 2,130,000 negroes was represented
by 700,000 in 1825.—{See note to p. 192, chap. Y.)
This result has only been paralleled in the Southern
States of our own confederacy, for even in the free
negro islands of the American Mediterranean, we
are led, by the best information wo can obtain, to
suppose that the black population, as well as the
white, experiences a constant decrease. If it l*o
true that population can increase only under a con-
                             1 See note at the close of Chapter V.
                                                             SLAVERY.
231
 -dition of physical well-being, and that a decrease
denotes a condition of physical suffering, the situa-
tion of the negro in Cuba must be vastly superior
to that of his own race in the free islands. That
his moral condition exhibits the same result we be-
lieve will be admitted by every impartial traveller
in the two countries.
   Another element has been introduced in the popu-
lation of Cuba, by the importation of several thou-
sands of Chinese, who are contracted to labor on the
sugar estates for a* period of years, at prices far
below the usual value of labor in the island. The
class of persons contracted with is usually the
lowest of the low in the crowded sea-ports of China.
No females are brought, and they are thus forced to
amalgamate with the slave population, to whom they
bring neither honest principles nor good morals. No
one who for a moment contemplates the inevitable
consequences of this resort of English philanthropy
to remedy ite social errors, can doubt its results;
the amalgamation of unequal and dissonant races of
men in their most degraded condition, can only be
productive of the greatest moi’al and social evils to
the community upon which it is forced.]
232
MJMROMjt’s CUBA.
                      CHAPTER YH.
                            RACES.
    But two now in the Antilles—Indians have disappeared—Confusion
    of early historians relative to their numbers—Character of
    estimates by early voyagers—Why Cuba might not have been
    as populous as represented—Cruelties of first settlers—-Early
    mode of computing population—Movement of colonization in
    • Cuba—Law of proportion of races—Havana—Cuatro Villas—
    Puerto Principe—St. Jago de Cuba—Density of population
    —Populous and uninhabited districts—Impossibility of the mili-
    tary defence of the island—Intellectual culture—Intelligence
    of the Habaneros—Apparent distance from Europe diminished—
    Declining influence of the old Spaniards—Admirable institutions in
    Havana—The necessity of reform.
      As the primitive population of the Antilles has
    entirely disappeared (the Caribbean zembos, a mix-
    ture of natives and blacks, having been removed
    from the island of San Vicente to Ratan, in 1796)
    we must consider their present population (2,850,000),
    as being entirely of European and African blood;
    The pure blacks form nearly two-thirds of it, the
    whites one-sixth, and the mixed races one-seventh.
    In the Spanish colonies on the continent, we find
                                                                                                                                KAC ICS.
233
 the descendants of the Indians who have disappeared
among the mestizos arid sambos (crossings of Indians
with whites and blacks), hut this consoling fact does
not present itself in contemplating the Antilles.
Such was the state of society there, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, that the colonists did not
mix with the natives, as do the English in Canada,
except in rare instances.
   The Indians of Cuba have disappeared like the
Guanches of the Canary Islands, although in Guana-
bacoa, and in Teneriffe, within forty years, we have
seen some fallacious pretences renewed, by which
many families drew small pensions from the govern-
ment, under the pretext that Indian, or Guancho
blood circulated in their veins. No means now
exist to arrive at a knowledge of the population of
Cuba, or Haiti, in the time of Columbus; but how
can we admit what some, in other respects judicious
historians, state, that when the island of Cuba was
conquered in 1511, it contairied a million inhabi-
tants, of whom 14,000 only remained in 1517? The
statistical information which we find in the writings
of the bishop of Chiapa (Las Casas), is filled with
contradictions, and if it be true that the good Domi-
nican friar, Luis Bertram (who was persecuted by
the grantees, as the Methodists in our days are by
some English planters), predicted, on his return to
m
                           humboldt’b cuba.
    Spain, that “ the 200,000 Indians now in the island
    of Cuba, will perish, victims to the cruelty of the
    Europeans,” we must conclude that between the
    years 1555 and 1567, the indigenous race was far
    from being exterminated. Yet, according to Gomara
    (such is the confusion of the historians of that time),
    there was not one Indian in Cuba after 1553.
      That we may form some idea of the vague char-
    acter of the estimates made by the early Spanish
    voyagers, at a time when no knowledge existed of
    the population of a single province in Spain, we
    need only recur to the fact that the number of
    inhabitants which Captain Cook and other naviga-
    tors estimated for Tahiti and the Sandwich Islands,
    varies from one to five, and that, too, at a periqd
    when statistics afforded exact means of comparison.
    It is easily perceived that Cuba, surrounded with
    banks abounding in fish, and having an extremely
    fertile soil, might have .maintained many millions of
    ‘those Indians, who were so abstemious that they did
    not taste of flesh, and cultivated only corn, yuca,
    and other alimentary roots. But had the population
    been so great, would it not have evinced a more
    advanced civilization than is revealed in the narra-
    tive of Columbus? Were the inhabitants of Cuba
    less civilized than those of the Lucayo Islands?
              However active we may suppose the destructive
                                                                         RACES.
235
  causes to have been, the cruelty of the conquerors,
&ie brutality of the governors, the too severe labors
of the gold washings, the ravages of the small pox,
and the frequency of suicide, we can hardly con-
ceive how, in thirty or forty years, I will not say a
million, but even three or four hundred thousand
Indians could become entirely extinct. The war
with the cacique Hatuey was of short'duration,
and confined entirely to the eastern part of the
island. Few complaints were made against the
administration of the first two Spanish governors,
Diego Velasquez and Pedro de Barba. The oppres-
sion of the natives began in the year 1539, with the
arrival of the cruel Hernando de Soto.1 Supposing
Gomara to be correct in stating that there were no
Indians fifteen years later, when Diego dej\lajarie-
gos was governor (1554-1564), we must suppose
that those who escaped to Florida in their pirogues,
   1 The researches of Don Juan Bantista de Munoz, in the archives
of Seville, have shown that cruelty to the Indians began very soon
after the conquest. The revolting atrocities committed by Vasco
Porcalla, in 1521, are cited by Sagra, and as early as 1534, the
Cuban officials, in their letters to the emperor, asked for “ 7,000
negroes, that they might become inured to labor before the Indians
ceased to exist.”- The mania of suicide to escape the labor imposed ,
upon them, was common among the Indians long before the time of
Hernando de Soto.—(See Sagra, Historia Fisica, Politico, y Natural}
large 8vo. Apend. pp. 8-2G.)
230
 humboldt’s uuba.
  believing, as tradition tells us, that they were return-
  ing to the land of their ancestors, must have com-
  prised a very considerable remnant of the population.
  The mortality observed among the negro slaves in the
  Antilles, in our days, may throw some light on these
  contradictory statements.
     Cuba must have seemed very populous to Colum-
bus and Velasquez, if it was as well populated as
when the English landed in 1762. Early voyagers
are easily deceived by appearances, because they
estimate the population from the numbers of people
that the apparition of European vessels brings down
to the shore. But we know that the island of Cuba,
with the same towns and villages that it now pos-
sesses, did not coiitain over 200,000 inhabitants, in
1762; and even in a country where the people are
treated like slaves, exposed to brutal masters, to
excessive labor, ill-fed, and subject to the ravages of
the small pox, forty-two years are not sufficient that
the land should retain only the memory of their mis-
fortunes. In many of the Lesser Antilles, which are
held by the English, population diminishes at the
rate of five or six per cent., annually; and in Cuba,
more than eight per cent.; but the entire destruction,
in forty-two years, of two hundred thousand, sup-
poses an annual loss of twenty-six per cent., which is
incredible, although we suppose the mortality of the
EAOES.
 237
 Indians to have been much greater than that of
negro slaves, purchased at high prices.1
   In studying the history of Cuba, we perceive that
the movement of colonization has been from east to
west, and that there, as in all the Spanish colonies,
the regions first settled are those which are now least
populous. The first settlement of the whites occur-
red in 1511, when the Poblador y Conquistador
Velasquez, under orders from Don Diego Columbus,
landed at Puerto de las Palmas, near Cape Maysi,
then called Alpha and Omega, and subjugated the
Cacique Ilatuey, who had fled from Haiti to the
eastern part of Cuba, where he became the chief of
a confederation of several smaller native princes.
In 1512 the city of Baracoa was founded, and soon
afterwards St. Jago de Cuba (1514), Bayamo, Trini-
dad, Santi Espiritu, and Havana. The latter city
was founded in 1515, on the southern coast of the
island, in the partido of Giiines, and four years later,
was transferred to the Puerto de Carenas, the posi-
tion of which, near the entrance of the two Bahama
channels (the old and the new), seemed much more
favorable for commerce than the coast southeast of
Batabano.
   1 Thus in tho Spanish version, and in the original French. It is
manifestly an arithmetical error.
238
dumboldt’s ouba.
    Since the sixteenth century, the progress of the
country has had a powerful influence on the relations
of the several classes of population to each other,
which vary in the grazing districts, and in those
where the country has been long since cleared; in
the seaports and in the country towns; in the dis-
tricts where the colonial staples are planted, and in
those which produce corn, vegetables and forage.
    I.   The district of Havana experiences a decrease
in tire relative white population of the capital, and
its vicinity, but not in the interior towns, nor in the
ontire Vuelta dc ATxijo. where the tobacco plant is
cultivated by tree labor. In 1791, the census of
Hon Luis de las Casas gave to the district of Havana
137,800 souls, in which the proportion of whites,
free colored, and slaves were as 53 : 20 : 27. More
recently, in 1811, when the importations of slaves
were very large, these proportions were estimated as
46 : 12 : 42.
    In the districts containing the largo plantations of
sugar and coffee, which are the districts of great
agricultural labor, the whites form barely one-third
of the population, and the proportions of class
(taking this expression in the sense of the proportion
of each to the total population), oscillates, for the
whites, betwoen 30 and 36; for the free colored,
between 3 and 6; and for the slaves, between 58 and
                         RACES.
239
   67; while in the districts of the Vuelta de Abajo,
   where tobacco is grown, it is found to be as 62:
   24 : 14; and in the grazing districts even, as 66 :
   20:14. From these calculations, it .would seem
   that where slavery exists, the proportion of free
   persons diminishes as population and refinement
   advance.
    [Note.—The relative proportions of class in the
   several districts here cited by Baron Humboldt, are
   stated as follows, in the censuses of 1841 and 1846 :
 .                                 mi.
                              t' 1       *N
        Western department,.. 39 : 10  : 51
        Sugar district,..... 39  :  0  : 55
        Tobacco district,...57   : 12  : 31
        Grazing do............59 : 15  : 26
    By this table, we perceive that the law of pro-
portion exhibits nearly the same relative numbers
stated by Baron Humboldt, and that the relative
proportions have slightly changed, with the increased
wealth of the island. We have elsewhere stated our
want of confidence in the returns of 184f>, and the
above table indicates where they may err in their
stated decrease of the slave population. While this
has not decreased in the sugar, tobacco, or grazing
districts, the returns for the whole department show
 18-16.
 46 : .12 : 42
34 : 5 ; 61
54 : 16 : 30,
57 : 18 : 25
240
humboldt’s cuba.
  a diminution in the total number of slaves. The
  capitation tax laid on house servants, in 1844,
  affords a partial reason for these diminished returns.]
    II.    The progress of population is more exactly
  known in the central and eastern portions of the
  island, than in the western department. That of the
  Cuatro Villas district has resulted from another
  class of industry. In Santi Espiritu, where the
  grazing haciendas increase, and in San Juan do los
  Eemedios, where an active contraband trade is car-
  ried on with the Bahama Islands, the proportion of
  whites has increased between the years 1791 and
  1811; while in the eminently fertile district of Trini-
  dad, where the sugar culture has increased in an
  extraordinary degree, it has diminished.
    [Note.—The law of population here expressed,
                      ■ still obtains in these districts. In 1841 the relative
                      proportions of white, free colored, and slaves, were—
           Santi Espiritu
            Remedios__
    ,      Trinidad .... III.
   III.   In the district of Puerto Principe the entire
population has been nearly doubled in twenty years,
and the white has increased eighty-nine per cent., as
in the best portion of the United States. Yet the
 65 : 15 : 20
63 : 20 : 17
37 : 22 : 41.]
RACKS.
241
 vicinity of Puerto Principe is nothing more than
vast plains, where half wild cattle are pastured. The
proprietors, says a modern traveller, are only assidu-
ous to put in their chests the money brought by
the overseers from their cattle-farms, from whence
they bring it forth only for the purposes of play, or
to carry on law-suits which have been handed down
from generation to generation.
   [Note.'—'Amid the general prosperity of Cuba, this
district now presents the anomaly of a constantly
decreasing population, the returns of the last three
censuses being as follows:—
           Whites.  Free colored.    Slaves. 
1827... . ...39,375 6,911.....    ... 15,704 
1841...    .30,104  7,599.....     ...13.383 
1846. ..  ...23,006 7,403.....     ...10,827 
   We have never been able to obtain a satisfactory
explanation of this fact; perhaps it may arise from
the low ratio of profit from the grazing farms, when
compared with other branches of labor, and the
want of roads and means of communication in the
district, which have combined to cause the popula-
tion to remove to more favored localities. The
recent completion of a railroad from the city of
Principe to the port of Nuevitas, and a newly-
awakened spirit of enterprise among tke landed
                                 31
242
                                                      humboldt’s cuba.
 proprietors, will, it is hoped, change this state of
things.]
   IV,     In the district of St. Jago de Cuba, considered
as a whole, the proportions of the different classes
have experienced little alteration during the last
twenty years. The partido of Bayamo is notable
for the large number of free colored (44 per cent.),
which increases yearly, as also in Holguin and
Baracoa. In the vicinity of St. Jago the coffee
plantations prosper and show a very considerable
increase in the slaves.
   [Note.—The law of population in this department
has experienced little change since the time of Baron
Humboldt’s researches, with the exception of the
district of Holguin. This district, situate on the
north side of Cuba, possesses a very large stretch of
the best agricultural lands, while its fine harbors, and
cleat coast, make it easily accessible to commerce.
It has entered upon a career of agricultural labor,
that holds out the most golden promise of reward;
and the law of its population begins to assimilate to
that of the Western department, which it may rival
in agricultural prosperity.]
                       In the official documents published at Havana, an
                       attempt has been made to compare the density of
                                                                       RACES.
243
  the population with that of the least populous
  portions of France and Spain. As the true area
  of the island was not then ascertained, these cal-
  culations have been inexact. We have already
  seen that the whole island has nearly two hundred
  inhabitants to the square league (in 1825); this is
  one-fourth less than Cuenca, the least populous pro-
  vince of Spain, and four times lesg than the higher
  Alpes, the least populous department of France.1
    1 Estimating the present population of Cubit by the pro raid of
  increase shown by the censuses of 1827 and 1841, the number and
  density of inhabitants at the close of 1855 is approximately os
  follows
                          Department. Population. Area, Square Miles. Density.
           Western.......... 966,000            8,077            120
           Central.......... 280,000           14,898           16'
           Eastern.......... 250,000           11,208            22
            Total......... 1,446,000           84,288            42
 Making the present density about 378 inhabitants to the square
league. The density of the Western department approximates very
nearly to that of Massachusetts ; that of the Central department to
Georgia; and that of the Eastern to Tennessee, as exhibited by
the census of 1850. The number of inhabitants to the square mile
in the principal countries of Europe, is as follows:— .
Belgium,____  ......888  Prussia,.. ...151 
England,....             Austria,..        
Holland, .... ......259   Denmark,, ...102 
France, ..... ......178 Portugal, .        
Switzerland,  ......160  Spain, ,.,        
 244                humboldt’s  cuba.
   The population of Cuba is so unequally distributed,
that we may consider five-sixths of the island as
uninhabited. There are several parishes (Consola-
cion, Maeuriges, IT an ab an a), in which there are
barely fifteen inhabitants to the square league;
while, on the other hand, in the triangle between
Bahia Honda, Batabano, and Matanzas (or, more
correctly stated, between the Pan of Guajaibon,
Batabano, and Guamacaro), there are 300,000 inha-
bitants in 410 square leagues, or in one-ninth of the
total area of the island; this is three-sevenths of its
population, and six-sevenths of its agricultural aud
commercial wealth. Yet this triangle contains only
732 inhabitants to the square league, its extent
being somewhat less than that of two of the medium
departments of France, and its density of population
one-lialf smaller. We should remember, that even
in this small triangle between Guajaibon, Batabano,
and. Guamacaro, the southern portion is entirely
uninhabited.
   The least populous parishes, containing only graz-
ing farms, are those of Santa Cruz de los Pinos,
Guanacape, Cacaragicaras, Pinal del Rio, Guane,
and Baja, in the Vuelta d and Maeuriges,
Iianabana, Guamacaro, and Alvarez, in the Vuelta
de Arriba.1 The hatos (largo cattle farms), with
   1 These districts of the Vuella de Arriba have now become the
                                                                        RA0E9.
245
 1,600 or 1,800 caballerias of uncultivated land, are
gradually disappearing; and, if the new settlements
at Guantanamo and N uevitas have not experienced
the rapid growth wliicli had been anticipated,
others, as for instance that of Guanajay, have been
very prosperous. (Expcdimte de Don Francisco de
   Arango, 1798, MSS.) In the preceding pages, I have
stated witli what facility the population of Cuba may
increase in future years. Being myself a native of
the cold North, that partakes in a small degree of
Nature’s bounty, I remember that the mark of
Bradenburg, which is in a great degree sandy,
maintains, thanks to an administration favorable to
agriculture and industry, a population twice greater
than that of Cuba, on an area three times smaller
than hers.
   The unequal distribution of the population, the
want of inhabitants on a great part of the coasts,
together with the great extent of these, make the
military defence of the island an impossibility; for,
neither the contraband trade, nor the debarcation of
an enemy can be prevented. Havana is, undoubt-
edly, a strongly fortified place, its works rivalling
 great scat of the sugar culture, and arc both populous and prosper-
ous. They are intimately connected with Havana, aud with the
ports of Matauzas and Cardenas, by a well-devised system of rail-
246
 htjmboldt’s ouba.
 ,r
 !ii-
 I,
  4
  :f,'
 „!*
 i-
 .i ■
 those of the most important cities of Europe; the -
small towers and forts of Cojima, Jaruco, Matanzas,
Mariel, Bahia Honda, Batabano, Jagua, and Trini-
dad, may offer a longer or shorter resistance, but
nearly two-thirds of the island has no defence what-
ever; for however active the service of gun-boats
may be, it could never be of much importance.
   Intellectual cultivation, limited entirely to the
whites, is distributed with the same inequality as the
population. The intercourse of the best society of
Havana resembles, in its polite forms and urbanity,
that of Cadiz and the richest commercial cities of
Europe; but as we leave the capital, and its neigh-
boring plantations inhabited by wealthy planters, we
notice the contrast presented by a state of partial
and local civilization, with the simple habits and
customs that obtain in the small towns and isolated
haciendas.
   Tbe Habaneros have been the first among the
rich Spanish colonists to travel in Spain, France,
and Italy. Nowhere are the politics of Europe,
and the springs which sustain or overturn a minis- ■
try, better understood than in Havana. This know-
ledge of passing events, and a foresight of the future,
have been of great advantage to the inhabitants of
Cuba, in freeing them from the difficulties which
delay the advance of colonial prosperity. In the
                                                                        KACE9.
247
interval of time elapsed from tlie peace of the Ver-
sailles to the revolution of St. Domingo, Havana has
seemed ten times nearer to Spain than Mexico, Car-
accas, or Hew Granada. During my residence in
the colonies, fifteen years later, this apparent inequa-
lity had already become greatly diminished. At the,
present time, when the independence of the conti-
nental colonies, the importation of the products of
foreign industry, and the outflow of the coinage of
the new States, have increased the intercourse
between Europe and America; when distance is so
much diminished by improvements in navigation,
and the inhabitants of Mexico, Colombia, and Gua-
temala, rival each other in visiting Europe, the
greater part of the old colonies of Spain, at least
those washed by the Atlantic, seem also to be much
nearer to our continent.
  Such are the changes produced in a few years,
and which are extending in an extraordinary degree,
by the diffusion of knowledge,' and by an activity
which had been long repressed, that the contrasts of
manners and civilization, which I hitd observed in
the beginning of the present century, in Caraccas,
Bogota, Quito, Lima, Mexico, and Habana, have
become less apparent. The influence of the original
Basques, Catalans, Gallegos, and Andalusians is
daily becoming less; and at this time it would be,
 24S                humboldt’s  cuba.
 perhaps, unjust to draw the distinctions of national
refinement in the six capitals I have just named, as
I had intended doing in another place.
   The island of Cuba has no great and sumptuous
establishments, whose foundation dates from a time
long anterior to those of Mexico; but Havana pos-
sesses institutions which the patriotism of the inhab-
itants, stimulated by a praiseworthy rivalry with the
other centres of American civilization, may enlarge
and perfect, when political affairs and public confi-
dence in the preservation of domestic repose-shall
permit it.1
   The Patriotic Society of Havana (founded in 1793),
those of Santi Espiritu, Trinidad, and. Puerto Principe,
which are branches of that at Havana;1 2 * * * * * the University,
with its professors]lips of Theology, Jurisprudence,
Medicine,8 and Mathematics, founded in 1728, in the
   1  This was written at a time when the Congress of American nations
at Panama, and the conspiracy of the £1 Soles de Bolivar” in Cuba,
inspired serious doubts of the stability of the Spanish power there. ■
   2  These societies were suppressed a few years since, and their func-
 tions merged in the Junta de Fomento.
                              “In 1825,-there were, in Havana alone, more than 500 licensed
                              physicians, 333 surgeons, latinos y romancistas (surgeons aud bar-
 bers), and -100 apothecaries. At the same time, there were, in the
wholo island, 312 lawyers (of which, 108 were in Havana), ahd 94
notaries. The number of lawyers has greatly increased since 1814,
when there were only 98 in Havana, and 130 in all the island-H.
RACES.
 249
 Dominican monastery;1 tlie chair of Political Econ-
omy, established in 1818, of Agricultural Botany,
the School of Descriptive Anatomy and Museum,
due to the enlightened zeal of Don Alejandro
Ramirez, the public Library, the Free School of
Drawing and Painting, the Nautical Academy, the
Lancasterian schools, and the Botanical Garden, are
noble institutions, partly new and partly old, some
of which are susceptible and worthy of improvement,
and others need a complete reform to bring them into
harmony with the wants of society and the spirit of
the age.
   *The clergy of Cuba is neither numerous nor rich, excepting tho
bishop of Havana, and the archbishop of Cuba; the first has
$110,000, and the latter $40,000 annual income.* Thp pre-
bendaries have $3,000 a year. The number of ecclesiastics does
not exceed 1,100, as appears by the official census which I pos-
sess.—H.
   * This has been greatly diminished by the expropriation of the church property.
                                li*
250
                             HUMBOLiyr’s.OUBA.
                          CHAPTER Vm.
                         SUGAR CULTURE.
Historical Bummary—Export of sugar from Havana to 1824-r-
  From Cuba to 1852—Estimates of actual product—Wealth of
  Cuba compared with the Antilles—St. Domingo—Brazil—Effect
  of political disasters on prices—Relative position of Cuba—
  Classes of sugar—Numerical elements of sugar planting—Value
  of land—Number of hands to a plantation, and their food—Machi-
  nery—Cost, product, and expense of a sugar plantation iu 1826.
  [Note—In 1855—Compared—Causes of increased product.]—
  Mean yield of land in sugar-cane, maple, and beet—Proportions of
  crystalliisable sugar—Different results in manipulations of cane-
  juice—Where improvements must be sought—Yield of cane in
  new and old lands—Compared with wheat—Yield in Bengal—
  Disproportion of results in agriculture in Cuba and France—First
  bdet-root sugar in Havana—Fears entertained—Changes in sugar
  culture—Increase—First cane planted in America—Several classes
  —Supposition of sugar-makers—Otaheitan cane has not degenerated
  —Want of fuel—Application of bagass—Wood and bagass com-
  pared—Experiments and inventions—Suggested by the author’s
  residence at salt-works—Error in Europe relative to the effect of'
  cessation of slave-trade—Number of slaves in sugar culture—In
  towns—Capture of Havana by the English, and its good effects—
  Causes of prosperity—Evils of government embarrass it.
                      When the Spaniards first settled in the islands,
                      and on the,continent of America, they began, as in
                                                                   SUGAH OULTUKIi.
251
 Europe, to cultivate the principal articles necessary
for the sustenance of man. This system of agricul-.
tural life among the people, is the most natural, and
is that which inspires society with the greatest con-
fidence, and it has been preserved in Mexico, Peru,
and the temperate and cold regions of Cnndina-
inarca, where the power of the whites has extended
over a vast expanse of country. Several alimentary
plants, as the plantain, yuca, maize, the cereals of
Europe, and the potato, have been, at different
, elevations above the level of the sea, the basis of
continental agriculture within the tropics. Indigo,
cotton, coffee, and the sugar-cane, are found only in
scattered groups in those countries.
   The same was the case in Cuba, and the .other
islands of the Antilles, for two and a half centuries.
The same plants which had served to maintain the
half-savage Indiau, were cultivated there, and the
vast plains of the larger islands were filled with
numerous herds of cattle. In 1520 Pedro do Atienza
planted the first sugar-cane in St. Domingo, and rude
cylinder presses, moved by water-power, are still
constructed there. Cuba participated very slightly
in this new industry, and it is most singular that the
historians of the conquest, at as late a period as
1553, do not speak of any other export, of sugar to
Spain and Peru, than that of Mexico. .Havana, far
252
 Humboldt’s cuba,
 from contributing to commerce what we now style
colonial staples, exported only hides and skins, until
the eighteenth century.
   The cultivation of tobacco and the care of bees,
the first hives of which were carried from Florida,
succeeded the raising of cattle. Wax and tobacco
were soon more important articles of commerce than
hides, and were in their turn, superseded by sugar
and coflee. The cultivation of these articles did not
diminish that of the former ones, and in these differ-
ent phases of agricultural industry, notwithstanding
the efforts we have seen to make the coffee culture
predominate, the sugar plantations have thus far
yielded the greatest returns. The export, through
licit and illicit channels, of coffee, tobacco, sugar,
and wax, has risen to fourteen millions annually,
estimated at the present value of those staples.
   The export of sugar from Havana alone during
the last sixty-four years, according to the custom-
house returns, is as follows
                   Fjom 1760 to 1763, average at most...... 13,000 Boxes.
        •<   1770  “ 1780........................... 50,000 “
        1786, ... 63,27-1 Boxes.
         1787..  ...  61,245  «
         1788..  ...  69,221  «
         1789..  ...  69,125  «
         1790..  ..   77,896  “
 1791, ... 85,014 “
 1792.. ... 72,854 “
 1793.. .. 87,970 “
1794,-....103,629 «
 1795.. ... 70,437 “
SUGAR CULTURE,
                                                                253
1790,...  .120,374 Boxes.          1804,..  ..193,955  Boxes* 
1797,...  .118,060        <(       1805,..  ..174,544    a    
1798,...  .134,872        u        1806, .  .. 150,510   a    
1799,...  .105,602        a        1807,..  .. 181,272   ti   
. 1800,.. .142,097        a        1808,..  ..125,875    it   
1801,...  .159,841        a        1809,..  ..238,842    a    
1802,...  .204,404        i<       1810,..  ..186,072    u    
1803,.... 158,073 “                                           
Prom 1811 to 1814 average yearly            ..■206,487   a    
1815,...  .214,111        n        1820,..  ..215,593    a    
                          a           CO                 tt   
1816,...  .200,487                  i---(   ...236,009        
1817,...  .217,076        tt       1822,..  ...201,795   tt   
1818,...  .207,378        a        1823,.,               tt   
1819,,..  . 192,743       a        1824,. . . .245,329   tt   
                      P This table, which is the most complete that has.been
                      , published up to the present time, is based upon a
                      great number of manuscript official documents,
 ■ which have been communicated to me; on the
Awrora, and Papel Periodico of Havana; the Patri-
ota Americano; the Guias de forasteros of Cuba;
the Sucinta Noticia de la situacion presente‘ de la
JIabana, 1800, MSS.; Reclamacion contra la ley de
Ara/nceles, 1821; and the Redactor General of Gua-
temala, July 1825, p. 25.
   1 According to the official returns, the export of sugar from Cuba,
since 1824, has been as follows:
 1826 ........
 182G to 1880 .v,
1831 “ 1885 ..
 488,770 BoxeB.
2,033,793     “
 2,43G,492    «
254
HUMBOLDT 8 CUBA
    In order to arrive at the exact export of sugar
from Cuba, we must add to the exports from Havana; . j
1st. That of the other open ports, particularly Matan-
zas, St. Jago. de Cuba, Trinidad, Baracoa, and Mariel;           .   (
 and 2d. The amount of contraband commerce.
 During my stay in the island, the export of Trinidad
was estimated at 25,000 boxes. In examining the
custom-house returns of Matanzas, wo must avoid
the repetition of amounts, and carefully distinguish
between the sugar exported directly to Europe, and                   j
 that shipped to Havana. In 1819, the real trans-                    <
 Atlantic export from Matanzas did not exceed one-
thii’teenth of that from Havana, and in 1823 I found                 ]
 it to be one-tenth. According to these data, we                     i
 may add to the 235,000 boxes, which is the mean
term of export from Havana alone for the last eight
yearn (in 1825), at least 70,000 boxes shipped from
other ports; so that (estimating the frauds in the                  !■
 custom-house at one~fourth), the total export of the                }
 island is more than 380,000 boxes of sugar yearly.                  j
    Well-informed persons estimated the consumption
         f886 to 1840................ 3,171,423  Boxes.              ’ ■ j
         1841 « 1846 ................ 4,024,405                      “ i
         1846 “ 1850 ................ 4,840,768  “
         1851 ....................... 1,539,994  “
         1862 ....................... 1,409,012  «
    No official returns of the commerce of the island, since 1852, have
been published
 It
 b
255
                                                            SUGAR CULTURE.
 of Havana, in 1794, at 18,600 boxes, ?.nd 45,600
that of all the island. In view of the fact that
the population of the island at that time was
about 362,000, of which, at most, only 230,000
were free, and that it is now 715,000, of which
 455.000  are free, we must estimate a total consump-
tion in 1825, of 88,000 boxes. But supposing it to be
 60.000   boxes, we have a total product of at least
 440.000  boxes from the sugar plantations.
   That we may more exactly comprehend the
agricultural wealth of Cuba, let us compare the pro-
duction of that island in moderately productive years,
with that of the other Antilles.1
   SLAVE POPULATION AND EXPORT OF BUGAR IN 1823.
                                                                                                  Slaves.
    Cuba,......................................260,000
    Jamaica,..................................-342,382
    Barbadoes, Granada, and St. Vincent,. .128,000
    Trinidad,............................ *.....23,500
    All the English Antilles,..................626,800
    French Antilles,...........................178,000
    Dutch, Danish, and Swedish Antilles,... 61,300
  Export.
1,520,000 cwt.
1,417,488
79,4,567
189,891
3,005,366
794,760
354,386
     1 We have here reduced Baron Humboldt’s extended remarks to
   the tabular form, for greater conciseness. The export of sugar from
   Cuba, in 1851, had increased to six millions hundred weight, while
   that of all the English West Indies had fallen to about 2,750,000
   hundred weight.
256
humboldt’s ouba.
      The present export from St. Domingo is very
    insignificant. In 1788 it amounted to 80,360,000
    kilogrammes, and in 1799 it was still estimated to
    reach twenty millions kilogrammes. If it had been
    maintained as in the time of its greatest prosperity,
    it would augment the export of sugar of all the
    Antilles 28 per cent, and that of all America 18 per
    cent. Brazil, Guiana, and Cuba together, with their
    2,526,000  slaves, supply (in 1825) nearly 230,000,000
    kilogrammes; that is to say, exclusive of contraband,
    three times more sugar than St. Domingo, at the time
    of its greatest prosperity. The great increase of pro-
    duct in Brazil, Demarara, and Cuba, has replaced the
    loss of Haiti, and made the destruction of the sugar
    industry of that island less sensible.
      The production of Brazil, which contains 1,960,000
    slaves, and where the sugar-cane is cultivated from
    the district of Eio Grande to the parallel of Puerto
    Alegre (30° 2' S. lat.), is much greater than is gene-
    rally supposed. In 18*16 it was, according to very
    exact data, 200,000 boxes, of 650 kilogrammes each,
    or 130,000,000 kilogrammes (about 650,000 cwt.).
    The production of sugar in this country has dimin-
    ished greatly since 1816, in consequence of domestic
    disturbances, and in years of great drought has
    barely reached 140,000 boxes. Those who are con-
    vei'sant with this branch of American commerce,
                                                           SUGAR CULTURE.
  257
  believe that when tranquillity lias been reestablished,
  the mean annual export of sugar will reach 192,000
  boxes.1
    Equinoctial America and Louisiana yield annually
(in 1825), to the commerce of Europe and America,
as appears by a minute comparison of all the partial
statistics, 460,000,000 kilogrammes of sugar, as fob
. lows
         Antilles;__1,147,500 slaves, 287, or 62 per cent
         Brazil,....2,060.000   “      125, “ 27 “ “
         Guiana, ....206,000    “        40, “ 9 “ “
    Great Britain alone, with a population of 14,400,000,
  consumes more than one-third part of the 460,000,000
  kilogrammes supplied by those countries of the new
  continent, where the slave-trade has gathered 3,814,000
  unfortunate slaves.
    The cultivation of the sugar cane is now so widely
  extended in different parts of the world, that any
  physical or political causes which might suspend, or
  destroy industrial labor in one of the great Antilles,
  would not affect the price of sugar, nor exercise that
  influence in the general trade of Europe and America
  they would have exercised when the great cultiva-
  tion was concentrated in a smaller space. Spanish
 ! 1 The product of sugar in Brazil, in 1851, amounted to 137,000 tons
  of 2,000 lbs. each.—Hunt's Merchant's Magazine.
      258              nuMnourris cwiia.
      writers liave often compared the island of Cuba, from
     the wealth of its productions, with the mines of Guana-
     juato in Mexico. And in truth, Guanajuato, at the
     beginning of the nineteenth century, supplied one-
     fourth part of all the silver from Mexico, and one-sixth
     of that from all America. Cuba exports at this time
     (1825), through licit channels, one-fourth of the*
     sugar from all the Antilles, and one-eighth of all the-
     sugar that goes from equinoctial America to Europe
     and the United States.
        In Cuba there are four qualities of sugar, accord-
     ing to its purity or degree of purging. Of each loaf,
     or cone with the base uppermost, the upper part
     gives white sugar, the middle gives brown, and the
     lower, or point of the cone gives cucuruelw; these
     three grades of Cuba sugar are purged, and but a
     small portion is manufactured as raw, or moscdbado
     sugar. As the purging forms are of different sizp,
     the loaf varies in weight; it is usually about twenty-
     five pounds after being purged. The sugar masters
     desire that , each loaf should give. $ of white, $ of
     browit, and -J- of cucurucho sugar.
        During my residence in the plain of Guinea, I
     endeavored to gather some exact data relative to
     the numerical elements of sugar-cane planting. A
     large sugar plantation producing from 2,000 to 2,500
     boxes, generally has fifty caballerias of land (about
SUGAR CULTURE.
 259
 1,600 acres), one-half of which is planted in cane,
and the others appointed for alimentary plants and
pastures, which latter are calledpotreros. The value
of the land naturally varies according to its quality,
and vicinity to the ports of Havana, Matanzas, or
Mariel. In a radius of twenty-live leagues around
Havana, the value of each caballeria may be estima-
ted at two or three thousand dollars.1
   That a plantation may produce 2,000 boxes of
sugar, it must have three hundred negroes.2 An
adult male slave, who is acclimated, is worth 450 or
500 dollars, and an unacclimated, newly imported
African, 370 to 400 dollars. A negro costs from 45
to 50 dollars a year in food, clothing, and medicine,
    1 The land measure known as a caballeria, is a square, having 18
cordclsy each cordel being 24 varas, or 432 varas of a side ; conse-
quently, a caballeria has 186,624 square varas, equivalent to 32 1-10
English acres.—H.
    a There are very few plantations in Cuba that make 2,500 boxes.;
only those of Rio Blanco, of the Marquis de Arcos, of Don Rafael
O’Farril, and Dona Felicia Jauregui, attain this quantity. *. Those
which produce 2,000 boxes, annually, are considered first class sugar
plantations.—II.
    There has been a great change in this respect, since Baron Hum-
boldt wrote, and a large number of the plantations in the Western
department yield from 4,000 to 5,000 boxes, annually. A first class
sugar plantation in Cuba now yields from 7,500 to 10,000 boxes,
aunually.
260
HUMBOLUt’s CUBA.
      consequently, including the iutercst on capital, and
       throwing off the holidays, the cost otHabor is a little
       more than twenty-live cents a day. The slaves are
       supplied with jerked beef from Buenos Ayres and
       Caraccas, and salt fish, when meat is dear; with
       vegetables, such as plantains, pumpkins, sweet pota-
       toes, potatoes, and corn. In the year 1804, jerked
       beef was worth 5 to 6 cents a pound in Guinea, and
       in 1825, its cost is from 7 to 8 cents.
         On a sugar plantation such as wre are describing,
       producing 2,000 or 2,500 boxes of sugar, there are
       required, 1st, three cylinder mills, worked by oxen
       or water-power; 2d, eighteen kettles, according to
       the old Spanish method, which, having a very slow
       fire, burns much wood; and according to the
       French method, introduced in 1801, by Bailli, from
       St. Domingo, under the auspices of Don Nicolas
       Calvo, three clarifiers, three large kettles, and two
       boiling trains (each having three boilers), in all,
       twelve pieces. It is generally said that seventy-five
       pounds of purged sugar yields one keg (seven gal-
       lons) of molasses; and that this, with the refuse
       sugar, covers the expenses of the plantation; but
       this can be true only where large quantities of rum
       are made. Two thousand boxes of sugar give 15,000
       kegs of molasses, which will make 500 pipes of rum,
       worth $25 each.
                                                          SUGAR CULTURE.
261
    If we form a table of product and expenditure
from these data, we find—
     2,000 Boxes Sugar (white and brown), at $24,__ $48,000
       500 Pipes of Rum, at $25,.................... 12,500
                                                  $60,500
     The yearly expenses of the plantation are csti- •
       mated at....................................... $30,000
    The capital invested consists of
      50 caballerias of land, at $2,500,..............$125,000
      300 ucgroes, at $450,........................... 135,000
      Buildings, mills, &c.,........................... 80,000
      Cattle, and general inventory,.................. 130,000
                                                      $470,000
   From this estimate, we find that if a plantation
capable of producing 2,000 boxes is established, the
capitalist would receive 6£ per cent, interest, accord-
ing to the old Spanish method, and the present
prices of sugar. This return is not exorbitant for
an establishment that is not purely agricultural, and
whose expenditures are always the same, even though
the return should fall off one-third. We need not
he surprised, therefore, that the cultivation of rice
should he preferred in Cuba to that of sugar, when
the price of the latter is so low as 4 or 5 cents a
pound.
262
                         humboldt’s ouba.
            The profit of a plantation, established some time
         since, consists in, 1st, the fact that, twenty years
         since, the cost of making a plantation was much less
         than now; for, a caballeria of good laud cost then
         only $1,200 or $1,600, instead of $2,000 or $2,500,
         as now; and an adult negro $300, instead of $450 to
         $500; and, 2d, the variable returns—the prices of
         sugar having been at times very low, and at others
         very high. The prices of sugar have varied so
         much, during a period of ten years, that the return
         on the capital invested has varied from five to fifteen
         per cent.
            [Note.—That the reader may compare the state
         of the kugar industry, at the present time, with the
         foregoing clear statement of its numerical elements,
         we insert hero the estimates presented in an able
         and lucid work on the political and economical con-
         dition of Ouba, printed during the present year,
         1855, for private circulation. It is from the pen of
         a gentleman distinguished alike for his literary-,
         attainments, his ability as a sugar planter and econ-
         omist, and lus disinterested zeal for the welfare of
         his native land. He says:
            “We select a plantation producing 4,000 boxes,
         which is neither one of the colossal ones recently
         made, nor one of those deemed small.
                           SUGAR CULTURE.                         263
           300 negroes of both sexes and various ages
               at $600,...............................  $180,000
            34 caballerias of land, in cane, at $2,500,,, 85,000
             6 caballerias of land, at $2,000,..........  12,000
           Steam engine and cane mills,-................. 16,000
           Buildings,.................................... 35,500
           Boiling trains, &c.,.......................... 15,000
                                                       $343,500
       Less—First value of land, which remains on
             ground rent, $600 a caballeria.............. 24,000
                                                       $319,500
           4,000 boxes of sugar, average, $16...........$64,000
           Product of molasses sold,..................... 6,000
                                                        $70,000
                                                                The yearly expenses of the plantation are esti-
                                                                mated, inclusive of an annual purchase of
             cattle at................................  $36,110
           Repairs and replacing material, ............. 14,600
                                                        $50,710
     leaving a profit of $19,290, being a return of 6J per
    cent, on the capital invested.”
      The number of hands on the plantation is the
    same in both estimates, and there is one-fifth less
    laud in the modern than in the old plantation, while
    the product of sugar is exactly double. This great
    difference of yield arises, in part, from the following
    circumstances, and in part, perhaps, from improve-
264.
humboldt’s ouba.
        merits in tbo mode of culture, and of expressing the
       juice from the cane. Thcvable writer I have just
       quoted estimates that the improved division of labor,
       the use of steam-power, the introduction of mechani-
       cal appliances, as railway from the boiling-house to
       the purging-house, pumps for several purposes, and
       water pipes, improved furnaces and clarifiers, cane
       carriers, bagass-carts, &c., and the greater facilities
       of transition to market, make an actual saving of
       seventy-nine hands to the plantation.
          This largely increases the number of hands that
       can be applied to field labor, and consequently
       increases the breadth of land in cane, while the use
       of steam-power, and a small increase in the capacity
       of the boiling trains, suffices for the purpose of
       manufacture. Such is the magical influence of the
       improved mechanical appliances of our day, upon
       the product of man’s labor. Great improvements
       have also been effected in the chemical processes of
       engar-making; but their effect is, perhaps, expe-
       rienced more in the improved quality, than in the
       greater1- quantity of sugar produced. The sugar
       planters of Cuba, as'a class, are exceedingly intelli-
       gent, and quick to adopt improvements in their
       system of labor.]
          Prom calculations which I made, when in Cuba, I
 *•<
                                                          SUGAR CULTURE.
265
    have estimated that a hectar of cane gives a mean
    of twelve cubic metres of juice, from which are
    extracted,- by the method at present in use, at most,
    ten or twelve per cent, of raw sugar. Considering,
    therefore, the juice as a liquid charged with salts, it
    contains, according to the fertility of the soil, from
    twelve to sixteen per cent, of crystallizable sugar.-
    The sugar maple, in good lands in the United States,
    yields 450 grammes of sugar to eighteen kilogram-
    mes of sap, being two and a half per cent. The
    same quantity of sugar is yielded by the beet root,
    comparipg this quantity with the entire weight of
    root. Twenty thousand kilogrammes of beets, grown
    in good land, yield five hundred kilogrammes of
    raw sugar.
      As the sugar cane loses one-half its weight, when
    the juice is expressed, it gives—comparing, not the
    product of juices, but the root of the common beet
    with the sugar cane—six times more raw sngar, to
    an equal weight of vegetable matter, than the beet
    root. The juice of the cane varies in its constituent
    parts, according to the nature of the soil, the quan-
    tity of rain, the distribution of heat in the different
    seasons, and. the earlier or later disposition of the
    plant to flower. It is not alone in the greater or less
    quantity of sugar held in solution, as some sugar-
    makers suppose; the difference consists rather in the
m
                         HUMBOLDT'S OUBA.
         proportions of crystallizable and uncrystallizable
         sugar, albumen, gum, green fecula, and malic acid.
            The quantity of crystallizable sugar may be the
         same, and yet, according to the operations used, the
         quantity of sugar extracted from an equal weight
         of juice, will vary considerably; this arises from the
         different connection between the other peculiar prin-
         ciples of crystallizable sugar. This sugar, on combin-
         ing with some of the other principles, forms a syrup
         which does not possess the quality of crystallization,
         and remains in the refuse. A too great degree of
         heat seems to hasten and increase the loss. These
         considerations explain the reason why the sugar-
         makers sometimes, at certain seasons of the year,
         consider- themselves bewitched, because, witli the
         same applications, they cannot make the same quan-
         tity of sugar. They also explain why the same juice,
         under modified operations—for instance, the degrees
         of heat, and the rapidity of boiling—yields more or
         less sugar.                                «
            It has been said, and I again repeat it, that we
         must not look for great improvements in the manur
         facture of sugar, from the construction or manner
         of setting the boilers and furnaces only, but from
         improvements in the chemical operations, a more
         intimate knowledge of the effect of lime, of alkaline
         substances, of animal carbon, and, lastly, in an exact
                                                          SUGAR CULTURE.
267
   determination of the maximum heat to which the
   juice should be exposed in the successive boilers.
   The ingenious analysis of sugar, starch, gum, and the
   ligneous principles, made by Messrs. Gay Lussac and
   Thenard, the labors carried on in Europe with grape
   and beet-root sugar, and the investigations of
   Dntrono, Proust, Clarke, Iliggins, Danioll, Howard,
   Ilracounot, and Derosno, have facilitated and pre-
   pared the attainment of these degrees of perfection ;
   but nothing has been done in the Antilles.
     The amalgamation of metals, on a large scale, iu
   Mexico, cannot, certainly, be improved without a
   previous examination, during a long stay at Guana-
   juato, or Peal del Monte, of the nature of .the
   metals placed in contact with the mercury, the
   muriate of soda, lime, &c.; in the same manner, to
   improve the technical manipulations on the sugar
   plantations, we must begin on several of those in
   Cuba, with an analysis by a chemist acquainted
   with the present state of vegetable chemistry, of
   small portions of juice taken from the several kinds
   of cane, in different soils, and at various seasons of
   the year. Without this preliminary labor, under-
   taken by some person from one of the most celebra-
   ted laboratories, and possessing a complete knowledge
   of the operations of sugar-making from beet-root, we
   may obtain some partial improvement, but the
         268                iicmboldt’s cuba.
         manufacture of sugar will always continue to be
         wliat it now is, that is to say, the result of experi-
         ments more or less satisfactory, hut which are made
         in the dark.
            In the lands that can be irrigated, and those
         where tuberous roots have been grown before
         planting the cane, a cabdlleria of fertile land,
         instead of yielding 1,500 arrobes of sugar, will
         yield 3,000 or 4,000 arrobes, which is equal to 2,660
         or 3,540 kilogrammes of white and brown sugar to
         the hectar. Taking it at 1,500 arrobes, and estimating
         it at the price in Havana, of $24 a box. we find that
         a hectar of land will produce in value, $15 40 in
         sugar, and $5 76 in wheat, supposing an eight-fold '
         yield, and a price of $3 60 per 100 kilogrammes. I
         have stated elsewhere, that in comparing these two
         branches of agriculture, we must bear in mind that
         sugar-planting requires a very large capital; at
         present, for example, in order to produce 2,000
         boxes in a single establishment, $400,000 are
         require^.
            In the irrigated lands of Bengal, an acre yields,
         according to Brockford and Roxburgh, 2,300 kilo-
         grammes of raw sugar, which is equal to 5,700 kilo-
         grammes to the hectar. This fertility being common
         to a large'breadth of land in India, we need not be
         surprised at the low pi ice of sugar there. The yield
                                                         SUGA.K CULTURE.
2G9
  of a hectar is double what it' is in the Antilles, and
  the daily wages of an East Indian is one-third that
  of a negro slave in Cuba.
     Supposing, as we should when we speak of the
  production of all Cuba, that in lands of mean fer-
  tility a caballeria yields 1,500 arrobes of .purged
  sugar, we find that nineteen and three-fourths
  square leagues (about 'one-ninth the area of one of
  the medium departments of France), suffice to pro-
  duce the 430,000 boxes of sugar which Cuba yields
  for domestic use and exportation. It seems surpris-
  ing that less than twenty square leagues of land can
  give an annual product, whose value (estimating a
  box of sugar in Havana at $24), exceeds $10,400,000.
  In order to supply the 56 or 60 millions kilogrammes
  of- raw sugar, consumed by the thirty millions of
  people in France, there would be required, within
  the tropics, nine and five-sixths square leagues of
  land cultivated in sugar-cane; in the temperate
  zone, thirty-seven and a half leagues of land in beet-
  root are necessary. A hectar of good land in
  France, planted in beet-root, produces from ten
  thousand to twenty thousand kilogrammes. The
  average yield is twenty thousand kilogrammes, which
  give 2} per cent., or 500 kilogrammes of raw sugar.
  One hundred kilogrammes of raw sugar, yield fifty
  kilogrammes of refined (30 of brown sugar and 20
270
iiumboldt’s Cuba.
        of loaf); consequently, a hectar, in beet root, yields
        250 kilogrammes of refined sugar.
           Shortly before my arrival at Havana, some sam-
        . pies of beet root sugar were carried there from
        Germany, and this article was said “ to menace the
        existence of the sugar-growing isles of America.”
        The sugar-planters saw, not without some alarm,
        that it was a substance exactly like cane sugar; but
        they consoled themselves with the hope that the cost
        of the labor, and the difficulty of separating the
        crystallizable sugar from so large a mass of vegetable
        pulp, would make the operation expensive and pro-
        fitless. Since that time chemistry has triumphed
        ever these obstacles; for, in 1812, there were in
        France two hundred manufactories of sugar from
        the beet root, working with variable results, and
        producing a million kilogrammes of sugar, annually.
        But the inhabitants of the Antilles, well aware of
        what transpires in Europe, entertain now no fears of
        the beet root, grape, or chestnut sugar, nor of the
        coffee of Naples, or the indigo of the south of
        France.
           The greatest changes which have been produced
        in the culture of the sugar cane, and the laboratories
        of the plantations, took place between the years
        1796 and 1800. First, mules were substituted for
        oxen, as motive-power for the sugar mills; then
                                                         SUGAK CULTURE.
271
  water-power was introduced in Giiines, it having
  been used even by the first settlers in St. Domingo;
  and, finally, experiments with steam-power were
  made at Ceibabo, by Count Jaruco y Mopox. There
  are now twenty-five of those steam-engines on differ-
  ent estates in Cuba.1 The cultivation of the Otahei-
  tan cane is also becoming very general. Clarifiers,
  and better arranged reverberating furnaces, have
  been introduced. We must also confess, in honor of
  the wealthy planters, that on a great number of
  plantations, the greatest care is taken of the sick
  slaves, of the children, and to increase the number
  of women.
     In 1775 the island contained 473 sugar planta-
  tions, and in 1817 there were more than 780. None
  of the former produced even a fourth part of the
  sugar that is now produced by a second-class planta-
  tion ; it is not, therefore, the number of plantations'
  alone, that will give us a true idea of the progress of
  this branch of agricultural industry. The district of
  Havana contained, in 1763, 70 sugar plantations; in
  1796, 305; in 1806, 4S0; and in 1817, 625.a
    1 The census of 184G states the number of sugar plantations with
  steam-power at 286, since when the number has very largely
  increased.
    ’ The number in 1846 was 735. In 1850, the total number of
  sugar plantations in Cuba exceeded 1750.
2Y2
humboldt’s cuba.
           The first plant of cane in virgin soil, carefully
         planted, will continue to yield for twenty or twenty-
         three years, hut, after that, it is necessary to replant
         every three years. On the hacienda Mataraoros,
         there was, in 1804, a cane-field, which had been
         planted forty-five years. The most fertile sugar
         lands now under cultivation (1825) are those in the
         vicinity of Mariel and Guanajay. The variety of
         'the sugar cane, known as Otaheitan cane, which is
         distinguishable at some distance by its deep green,
         yields, on the same lands, one-fourth more juice, and
         a larger and more woody fibre, and is consequently
         richer in combustible matter than any other variety.
           The sugar-makers on the plantations, who have all
         the presumption of a little learning, pretend that the
         juice of the Otaheitan cane is worked more easily,
         and that it yields more crystallizable sugar, and less
         cane-juice potash than that of the other varieties.
         This south sea canfe, after six or seven yearn’ cultiva-
         tion, certainly has a thinner rind, but the knots
         remain much further apart than in the creole cane.
         Fortunately the fears that were at first entertained,
         that the Otaheitan cane would degenerate into the
         ordinary sugar cane, have not been realized. In
         Cuba it is planted during the rainy months of July
         and October, and the crop is brought in from Febru-
         ary to May.
                                                          sugar culture.
273
      As the forests of Cuba have disappeared, through
    excessive clearing of the land, the sugar plantations
    have begun to experience the want of fuel. In
    former times, a small portion of bagass (the crushed
    cane), had been used to enliven the boiling fires,
    under the old kettles, but it is only since the immi-
    grants from St. Domingo introduced the reverberating
    furnace that the attempt to abandon wood, and burn
    only bagass has been made. In the old form of
    furnaces and kettles, a load of wood, of 160 cubic
    feet, is consumed to make five arrobes of sugar, so
    that for one hundred kilogrammes of raw sugar, 278
    cubic feet of lemon and orange wood are required.
    With the reverberating furnace of St. Domingo, one
    load of bagass containing 495 cubic feet, made 640
    pounds of raw sugar, which is equal to 158 cubic
    feet of bagass to 100 kilogrammes of sugar.
      During my residence in Giiines, and particularly
    at Rio Blanco, while at the house of the Count
    Jaruco y Mopox, I made experiments with several,
    new constructions for the purpose of diminishing
    the amount of fuel, by surrounding the fire with
    substances that were bad conductors of heat, attain-
    ing, at the same time, greater protection to the
    negroes while feeding the fire. A long stay at the
    salt works in Europe, and the art of practical salt-
    making which I had learned in my youth, gave me
                           12*
274   *
                        Humboldt’s cuba.
        the idea of those inventions, which have since been
        extended with some usefulness. Wooden covers
        placed on the clarifiers hastened the evaporation,
        and induced me to believe that a system of covers,
        and movable ladles suspended with counter-weights,
        might be usefully extended to the other kettles.
        This idea is worthy of examination, but we must
        graduate with care the quantity of syrup, the crys-
        tallizable sugar obtained, and that which is lost, the
        fuel, time, and pecuniary expense of the experiments.
          An error has generally prevailed in Europe, which
        has had no small influence in the study of the effects
        a cessation of the African slave trade might produce,
        in supposing that in the so-called sugar colonies of
        the Antilles the greater part of the slaves are
        employed on the sugar estates. There is no doubt
        that the cultivation of the sugar cane is one of the
        most powerful stimulants of the slave-trade, but a
        very plain calculation proves, that the mass of slaves
        in the Antilles is three times greater than the num-
        ber employed on the sugar plantations. Ten years
        since I stated, that if the 200,000 boxes of sugar,
        which Cuba exported in 1812, were made on the
        larger plantations, 30,000 slaves would suffice for
        that branch of industry.
          It is estimated in Cuba that for the production of
        1,000 boxes of clayed sugar, 150 negroes, on an
                                                        SUGAR CULTURE, i
275
     average, are needed; consequently 440,000 boxes
    would require only 66,000 slaves. If to these were
    added 36,000, which are required in Cuba, in the
    cultivation of coffee and tobacco, we find that of
    the 260,000 slaves now there, barely 100,000 suffice
    for the three great staples of colonial industry, upon
    which is based its active commerce. On the other
    hand, the tobacco is cultivated almost entirely by
    whites and free blacks. I have said elsewhere, and
    I base my statement on the very respectable
    authority of the Consulado of Havana, that one-
    third part (32 per cent.) of the slaves live in the
    cities and large towns, and, therefore, take no part
    in the rural labors. If therefore, we take into con-
    sideration: Is#, the large number of children not
    yet able to work, scattered over the plantations; '
    and,  2d, the necessity of employing a much larger
    number of negroes on the small and distant planta-
    tions, in order to produce an equal amount of sugar
    to that produced on the great plantations, we shall
    find that of 187,000 slaves in the rural districts, at
    least one-fourtli part, or 46,000, produce neither
    sugar, coffee, nor tobacco.               >      .
     I have stated that before the year 1762, Cuba
   contributed no more to commerce than is now done
   by the provinces of Veragua, Panama, and Darien,
   which, of the Spanish-American provinces, are the
276
HXJHEOLDt’s CUBA.
       least productive in agricultural products. An
       event which was apparently a misfortune, the
       capture of Havana by the English, awakened the
       public inind. The city was evacuated by them on
       the 6tli July, 1763, and from that time we trace the
       first efforts of a new-born industry.1
          The construction of new fortifications on a gigan-
       tic scale,2 placed large sums of money in immediate
       circulation, and the slave-trade, which was subse-
       quently thrown open,3 increased the number of
       hands on the sugar plantations. The freedom of
       commerce with all the ports of Spain, and occasion-
       ally with the neutral powers; the wise administra-
         1 The city of Havana surrendered to the British forces, under
      Count Albemarle and Admiral Sir George Pocock, on the 12th
      August, 1762, after a siege of two months and six days. The
      amount of booty divided equally between the army and navy was
      £736,185 3s. The English forces also occupied Matanzas and
      Mariel, but the greater portion of the island never recognized their
      government. It was returned to Spain by the treaty of Paris, and
      formally given up on the 6th July, 1763, the English having
      remained in possession ten months and twenty-four days. During
      this time new life was given to agriculture in Cuba by England’s
      w commercial activity, and by the desire of opening a new mart for
      her African slave-traders. (See Pczuela’s Ensayo Historico de la
      Islade Cuba).
         a It is stated that in the construction of the Cabanas fortress
       alone, fourteen millions of dollars were expended.—II.
         * By royal decree, of 28th February, 1789.—H.
                                                                 SUGAK CULTUIiK.
277
   tion of Don Luis de las Casas; the founding of the
   Consuladoimd the Patriotic’ Society;1 the destruc-
   tion of the French colony of St. Domingo, and the
   consequent increase in the value of sugar; the
   improvements in machinery and furnaces, due, in
   great part, to the refugees from Haiti; the more
   intimate intercourse between the planters and the
   merchants of Havana; the great amounts of capital
   invested in tlie sugar and colfee plantations; are
   causes which have successively influenced the pros-
   perity of Cuba. This has continued to advance,
   notwithstanding the evils of conflicting branches of
   government, which embarrass the march of pro-
   gress.’ 1 2
     1 Since suppressed.
     2   The complicated state of the administration of justice and of
   jurisdiction is such, that in the “ Memoria acerca de la situacion
   presente de la Ysla de Cuba,” p. 40, twenty-five different civil and
   ecclesiastical tribunals are enumerated. These subdivisions of the
   administration of justice well explain what we have already stated
   regarding the great and increasing number of lawyers.—H.
278
iiumboldt’s cuba.
                          CHAPTER IX.
                                AGRICULTURE.
      Increase of tithes an evidence of prosperity—Table of agricultural
       wealth—Hatos and Totreros {note)—Pecuniary relations of plant-
       ers and merchants—Rate of interest—Slave-trade—Coffee planting
       —Product—Yield per hand compared with sugar — [Note.—
       Decline of coffee planting—Causes.]—Tobacco planting—Former
       monopoly—Product—Decline—Factoria—Prices—Quantity pur-
       chased, and where sold—Expenses of Factoria—State of tobacco
       planting in 1820-5—[Note.—Obstacles to tobacco planting—
       Future prospects—Present product—Prices—Error of Baron Hum-
       boldt-Probable causes of superiority of the tobacco from the
       Vuelta de Abajo.]—Other products in Cuba—Wheat—Wine-
       Wax.
       The increase of tithes being everywhere one of
      the most certain evidences of the increase of public
      wealth, I present here a statement of their product
      for fifteen Real's. The tithes and minor ecclesiastical
      revenues of the diocess of Havana, were farmed for
      terms of four years, as follows:
               1789- to 1792 .............* 792,386
               1793  « 1796 ............. 1,044,005
               1797  « 1800 ...........   1,595,340
               1801  “ 1804 ............. 1,864,464
                                                            AGKIOULTUEE.
279
        We see here that the tithes in the last term
     amounted to the mean annual sum of $466,000,
     although sugar pays only one-twentieth, or half
     tithes.1
        1 la 1792, coffee, indigo, and cotton were declared exempt from
     tithes, for ten years; and, in 1804, this exemption was made perpe-
     tual, and was extended to sugar plantations then in existence. In
     1817, the tithes on sugar were reduced to two and a half per cent.
     These changes in the law, and the great changes that have occurred
     since the beginning of the present century in the objects of agricul-
     tural labor, have naturally produced a fluctuation in the product of
     this tax, as many lands that paid tithes, while held as cattle farms,
     &c., when planted in cane, ceased to contribute, and the product of
     the impost has been, in a great measure, maintained and increased
     by the advance of the minor branches of agriculture. It is still
     farmed out, and is payable in money or kind, being compounded.
     This tax is most onerous upon the small farmers, upon whom the
     tithe collectors are very exacting, because of their inability to main-
     tain an expensive litigation, while the large proprietors can always
     compound on more favorable terms. Sagra states the tithes for the
     bishopric of Havana, from 1805 to 1828, as follows:
           1805 to 1808......$1,545,059       1817   to 1820...$1,606,672
           1809 “ 1812....... 1,501,212       1821    “ 1824... 1,449,409
           1818 “ 1816....... 1,600,841       1825    “ 1828     1,250,805
        The tithes of the archbishopric of Cuba also show a diminution.
     The same writer states them as follows:
                      1819 to 1822 ...................$79,010
                      1828 « 1826 .................... 40,487
                      1827 “ 1880 .................... 89,595
     , The revenue from this tax has recovered, and even surpassed its
     former yield, being now about $500,000, annu^ly.
280
                              iiumboldt’s cuba.
         The agricultural wealth of the department of
        Havana, in 1817 was:
         Sugar plantations,....  625    Tobacco plantations, 1,601
         Coffee plantations,...  779    Churches,............ 224
         Potreros............. 1,197    Houses,........... 42,268
         'Haciendas,............ 930
         [Note.—That of the three departments is stated
       as follows, in the census of 1816:
                Sugar       Coffleo    Potroioa, Hacienda*.   Churches. House s. 
             Plantations. Plantation*.                                           
   Western,. ..... 735       1,012     1,648     193    8,990       229 56,104   
s Central,,.                   78      4,805     676      967        65 81,079   
  Eastern, . ..... 803        580      2,888     470    4,145        86 25,779   
    Total,..                 1,670     8^691     1,289 9,102        830 112,902  
        To these, we may add the following number of
      farms, called Sitios de labor: In the Western, 12,286;
      Central, 6,678 ; Eastern, 6,328.]
        The extraordinary expenditures required by the
      large sugar plantations, and the frequent domestic
       ,1 The Hatos or Haciendas de Cria) and the Potreros, are cattle
      farms. The first are often two or three leagues in diameter, without
      fences, where half-wild cattle are pastured. Two or three horsemen
      only are necessary on them, who traverse the country looking after
      the cows, and collecting and marking the calves. The Potrej'os are
      smaller cattle farms, fenced, and frequently having some land
      planted in maize, yuca, and plantain. Cattle are there fattened, and
      sheep, swine, and goats reared.—!!. *
                *
                        AGRICULTURE.               281
    misfortunes caused by play, luxury-, and other evils,
    place the landed proprietors in a state of absolute
    dependence upon the merchants. Hie most frequent
    loans are those made to the planters, upon condition
    of repayment from his crop of sugar, or coffee, at
    prices two rials per arrobe of the first, and two dol-
    lars per quintal of the last; less than the current
    rates in market. Thus a crop of one thousand boxes
    of sugar is sold in anticipation, at a loss of $4,000.
    The demand for money for business transactions, and
    the scarcity of coin, is so great that the government
    at times is forced to borrow at ten per cent., and
    individuals at even twelve and sixteen per cent,
    interest. The great profits made in the African
    slave-trade, sometimes amounting on a single voy-
    age in Cuba to 100 or 125 per cent., have contri-
    buted to increase the rate of interest; for many
    parties hire money at 18 or 20 per cent., for the
    purpose of following this infamous trade. The
    traffic is not only barbarous in itself, but it is also
    unreasonable, as it does not attain the object it pro-
    poses ; for like a stream of water brought from a
    long distance, more than one-half of it, even in the
    colonies themselves, is turned aside from the cultiva-
    tion of the lands for which it was destined.
                      Coffee.—The cultivation of coffee, like the
                      improvements in sugar making, dates from the
      282               humboldt’s  cuba.
      arrival of the immigrants from St. Domingo, or,
      more particularly, from the years 1796 and 1798.
      On a coffee plantation having 35,000 trees, a hectar
      of land yields 890 kilogrammes of coffee. In the
      district of Havana there were, in 1800, 60 coffee
      plantations, and 779 in 1817. As the coffee tree
      does not yield abundantly before the fourth year,
      the export of coffee from the port of Havana, in
      1804, was only 50,000 arrobes; since then it lias
      increased. It was in
1809.. .... 320,000  1819... ... 642,71G 
1815 . .... 918,263 1820.... ... C86,046 
1816.. .... 370,229 1822..., ... 501,429 
1817.. .... 709,351 1823..., ... 895,924 
1818.. .... 779,618 1824,.,,             
          These figures show a great variation, which arises
       from frauds in the custom-house, as well as from
       more or less abundant crops; for the results of the
       years 1815,' 1816, and 1823, which might be sup-
       posed the least exact, have been lately compared
       with the ctistom-liouse returns. We may estimate
       the total export from Cuba (in 1825) as follows:
       From Havana, average from 1814 to 1824...... 694,000 arrobes.
       Matanzas, Trinidad, St. Jago, &c............ 220,000     “
       Frauds in the custom-house................... 304,000    “
                                             Total....... 1,218,000
                                                             AGRICULTURE.
283
      By this calculation it appears that the export of
   coffee from Cuba is greater than that from Java,
   which was estimated by Mr. Crawford, in 1820, at
   190,000 piculs, or Ilf kilogrammes; and than that
   from Jamaica, which, in 1823, did not exceed,
   according to the custom-house returns, 169,734 cwt.,
   or 8,662.478 kilogrammes.
      While the price of sugar in Havana is always
quoted by the arrobe, of 25 pounds, that of coffee is
quoted by the quintal of 100 pounds. The latter
has varied from $3 to $30, and in 1808, it fell even
below the former price. During the years 1815-19
it sold from $13 to $17 the quintal, and now rules
at $12. It is probable that the cultivation of coffee
in Cuba does not employ over 28,000 slaves, the
annual average product of which is 305,000 quintals,
worth, at present prices, $3,660,000. At the same
1 time, 66,000 negroes produce 440,000 boxes of sugarj
which, at the price of $24 a box, are worth
$10,560,000. By this estimate we see that each
slave produces, annually, in value, $130 in coffee,
and $160 in sugar. It is almost needless to observe,
that these sums .vary with the alterations in price of '
the two articles named, the variations of which arc
sometimes in opposite directions, and that in these
’ calculations, which may give some idea of intertro-
pical agriculture, I embrace the domestic consump-
284
humboldt’s cuba.
       tion, and the licit and contraband export, under the
       same point of view.
         pSfoTE.—The product of coffee in Cuba has stea- *
       dily declined for some years past, under the compe-
       tition with the greater profits from sugar culture,
       ■ and the less cost of coffee produced by the cheaper
       slave labor of Brazil, where, for a series of years
       before the total cessation of the African slave-trade,
       in 1851-2, slaves were sold at an average price of
       $300 to $350. It reached its highest point about
       1835, as will be seen by the following tables of
       exports, compiled from the custom-house returns:
1825 to 1830  Qqs. 2,149,581 Average, 429,71G  
1830 «  1835   t(  2,494,479 u  499,000        
1835 “  1840   a   2,347,058 a  409,412        
1840 “  1845   it  1,066,247 u  333,249        
1845 “  1850   it  900,300   tt 192,001        
1851 ..        <(  143,780                     
1852. .        it  193,837                     
        About seventy per cent, of the export in 1852 was"'
      from the Eastern department, where the competition
      of the sugar culture for the employment of slave
      labor, has not been experienced to the same extent
      as in the western part of the island.]
        Tobacco.—The tobacco of Cuba is celebrated in
                                                            AGRICULTURE.
285
   all parts of Europe where smoking prevails; it was
introduced there, in imitation of the natives of
' Haiti, toward the close of the sixteenth, and begin-
. ning of the seventeenth century. At one time it
was generally believed, that if the cultivation of
■tobacco was relieved from all the trammels of an
odious monopoly, it would be to Havana the source
of a great' commerce. The beneficent intentions
evinced by the government six years since, in
abolishing the monopoly of tobacco culture and
sale, have not yet produced to this branch of agri-
culture the benefits which might have been expected.
The cultivators are poor, the rent of land has
increased in an extraordinary degree, and the
preference entertained for coffee planting (in 1825),
impedes the increase of the tobacco culture.
     The oldest data we possess, relative to the quan-
tity of tobacco supplied by Cuba to the factories of
the metropolis, are of the year 1748. According to
Haynal, who is a much more exact writer than is
generally believed, the yearly average, from 174S to
1753, was 75,000 arrobes. From 1789 to 1794 the
yearly product of the island amounted to 250,000
arrobes; but from that time to 1803, the high price
of lands, the preference given to coffee and sugar
planting, the vexations arising from the government
■ monopoly of purchase, and the impediments laid
humboldt’s ouba.
                                                                           286
      upon foreign commerce, have progressively dimin-
      ished the amount of product to less than one-half
      that quantity. But it is believed that from 1822 to
      1825, the amount of tobacco grown in Cuba has
      risen to 300,000 or 400,000 arrobes.
        The domestic consumption of the island is 200,000
      arrobes, or more. Up to the year 1791, the “Com-
      mercial Company of Havana ” delivered the tobacco
      of Cuba to the royal factories in Spain, under con-
      tracts which were renewed from time' to time with
      the government. The establishment of a govern-
      ment “Factoria de tabacos” in Havana, succeeded
      that company, and retained the monopoly of the
      trade to itself The tobacco was classified as supe-
      rior, medium, and inferior, and was received from
      the growers at fixed prices; in 1804, these were six,
      five, and two and-a-half dollars per arrobe ($24, $20,
      and $10 per quintal), respectively. By comparing the
      'different prices with the quantity of each class of
      tobacco produced, we find that the “ Factoria ” paid
      an average price of $16 per quintal for the leaf
      tobacco. With the expense of manufacture, the
      segars cost the government seventy-five cents per
      poundsnuff, fine grain and good color, 42f cents, 1
        1 The weight of the segars being about ten pounds to the thousand
      their cost would be $7 60 per thousand.
                                                           AGRICULTURE.
287
  and common soft, or Seville, 18| cents a pound, in
  Havana.
    In good years, when the crop (the product of
  advances made by the “ Factoria” to poor cultiva-
  tors), amounted to 350,000 arrobes of leaf, 128,000
  arrobes were manufactured for Spain, 80,000 for
  Havana, 9,200 for Peru, G,000 for Buenos Ayres,
  2,240 for Mexico, and 1,100 for Caraceas and Cam-
  peachy.1 In order to make up the amount of 315,000
  arrobes (for the crop loses ten per cent, of its
  weight, in loss and damage in the transportation and
  • manufacture), we must supposo that 80,000 arrobes
  were consumed in the interior of the island, that is,,
  in the country, where the royal monopoly did not
  extend.                              x
    The maintenance of 120 slaves, and the expenses
  of manufacture, did not exceed $12,000 yearly ; but
  the salaries of the officers of the “ Factoria” amounted
  to $541,000. The value of the 128,000 arrobes of
  tobacco sent to Spain, in the abundant years, either
  in segars, leaf, or snuff, at the customary prices
  there, exceeded the sum of five millions of dollars. 1
    1 Situation actual de la Real Factoria dc tabacos de la Haband,
  en Abril, 1804,—(Official MSS.). In Seville there were sometimes
  in store ten or twelve million pounds of tobacco, and the revenue
  from the tobacco mouopoly, in Spain, amounted, ill good years, to
  six millions of dol lars,—H.
        288              iiumboldt’s cuba.
        It is surprising to see in the returns of exports from
        Havana (documents published by the Consulado),
        that the exports for 1816 were only 3,400 arrobes;
        for the year 1823, only 13,900 arrobes of leaf tobacco,
        and 71,000 pounds of segars, the value of which was
        estimated by the custom-house at $281,000; and in
        1825, only 70,302 pounds of segars, and 167,100
        pounds of leaf tobacco and strips; but we must
        remember that no branch of the contraband trade is
        more active than that in .segars. The tobacco of the
        Vuelta dcAbajo is most celebrated, but large quan-
        tities are exported which are produced in the eastern
        part of the island. Although many travellers state that
        the total export of segars in late, yearn, has reached
        200,000  boxes (valued at two millions of dollars), I
        very much doubt it. If the crops were so abundant as
        this would indicate, why should Cuba receive segars
        from the United States for the use of the common
        people ?
          [Note.—The cultivation of tobacco has been one
        of the most uncertain-branches of industry in Cuba.
        Trammelled for a long time by odious restrictions
        and exactions, it was confined almost entirely to the
        poorer classes of the population, who were enabled
        to raise a scanty and uncertain crop, through the
        advances of capital made them by the “ Factoria.”
                                                            AGRICULTURE.
289
    After the suppression of this monopoly, it lias had to
    contend with the more popular and profitable pur-
    suits of coffee and sugar planting, which have suc-
    cessively competed with it for the employment of the
    skill, capital, and labor of the island. Its increase, how-
    ever, has been rapid and prosperous, as will be seen by
    the table of exports below, and with the increasing
    capital and wealth of Cuba, it is receiving a greater
    proportion of the labor of the country than has hereto-
    fore been bestowed upon it. When a still larger share
    of the skill and capital now absorbed in the caiie-fields,
    shall be turned to the tobacco vegas, we may look
    for more regular and certain crops, and a correspond-
    ing ratio of prosperity. There is also room for'great
    improvement in the classification and method of'
    packing the tobacco.
      Export of leaf tobacco and segars from Cuba:
                             Tobacco.      Segars. 
1825 to 1830.......                     M. 215,007 
1830 “  1835.......                      “ 471,003 
1835 “  1810 .....                       “ 700,285 
1810 “  1815......                    '* “ 041.407 
M                                                  
CO      1850 .....  ______ “ 36-1.183    “ 890,008 
        1851.....   ..... “ 04,306       “ 270,313 
        1852;./.;.      .... « 97.374    “ 180,610 
      V
                      These figures serve to sliow^the progress of this
                      branch of agriculture, but not its actual state; for
                             13
290
humboldt’b ouba.
     the contraband trade in tobacco and segars in Cuba
     is very great indeed.
       During the last twenty years, the prices of segars
     at Havana have very nearly doubled, and those for
     leaf tobacco have largely increased. We think
     Baron Humboldt was misinformed relative to the
     importation of segars in Cuba, from the United
     States, for the use of the common- people. Some
     small parcels of manufactured chewing tobacco are
     imported for sale, and formerly Kentucky tobacco
     could always be purchased in bond for the African
     slave-trade; but in our long residence in Cuba, we
     have never known segars to be imported there from
     the United States. The Vuelta             owes its
     fine and universally esteemed quality of tobacco,
     probably, as much to the physical formation of the
     country, as to any peculiar quality of its soil. Along
     the northern border of the district, where the best
     tobacco is grown, lies the high Sierra de los Orgarns,
     gathering, in rains upon its northern slopes, the
     moisture borne landward by the constantly prevail-
     ing trade winds; and this, with the effect of the
     surrounding heated waters of the Caribbean sea, and
     the Gulf of Mexico, give to the region south of this
     ridge a character of climate peculiarly its own.]
       After speaking of sugar, coffee, and tobacco, the
                     AGRICULTURE.                 291
 three products of greatest importance, I will not treat
of the cotton, indigo, nor wheat of Cuba. These
three branches of colonial industry yield very little,
and the proximity of the United States and Guate-
mala, makes their increase hardly possible. The
State of San Salvador exports, at this time, 12,000
bales, or 1,800,000 pounds of indigo, valued at two
millions of dollars.
   Wheat grows well, to the surprise of travellers
who have visited Mexico, in the district of Cuatro
Villas, at a slight elevation above the level of the
sea; but its cultivation is, in general, very limited.
The flour is good, but its production offers few
attractions to the colonial agriculturalist; for the
fields of the United States, that Crimea of the New
World, yield too abundant crops to permit the
native cereals to sustain themselves by a system of
prohibitive duties, in an island contiguous to the
months of the Mississippi and Delaware. The same
difficulties attend the cultivation of flax, hemp, and
the vine.
   Even the people of Cuba are not aware, perhaps,
that in the first years of the conquest by the Span-
iards, wine was made from the juice of wild grapes,
in their island. This vine, peculiar to America, has
given rise to the very general error that the true
Vitis       Yiniferais common to both continents. The
292
                          htjmboldt’s ouba.
       wild grapes, which gave a slightly acid wine, in
       Cuba, were probably gathered from the Vitis tilice-
       folia, which Mr. Wildernow has described in our
       herbariums. In no part of the northern hemisphere,
       up to this time, has the vine been cultivated for the
       purpose of making wine, south of the latitude of
       28° 40' which is that of the island of Ferro, one of
       the Canaries, and 29° 2', the latitude of Abushcer,
       in Persia.
         Wax is not produced by indigenous bees (Meli-
       pones of Mon. Latreille), but by bees introduced
       from Europe by way of Florida: This trade was
       not of much importance previous to 1772. The
       entire export of the island, from 1774 to 1779, one
       year with another, did not exceed 2,700 arrobes;
       and, in 1803, it was estimated (including the contra-
       band) at 42,700 arrobes, of which 25,000 went to
       Vera Cruz. The churches in Mexico consume largely
       of Cuban, wax; the price varies from $16 to $20 per
       arrobe. The number of arrobes exported from
       Havana alone, by the custom-house returns, has
       been as follows:
1815...... .... 23,398  1820.... ...... 16,939 
1816...... ..... 22,365 1822..,. ...... 14,450 
1817......    20,076    1823.... _____16,692   
1818...... ..... 24,156 1824.... ...... 16,068 
1819...... .... 19,373  1825.... ...... 16,605 
                                                          AGRICULTUEE.
293
    [Note.—From all the island—
       1840 to 1845..'187,035    1851...... 67,453
       1845 “ 1860... 290,000    1852..... 58,691]
    Trinidad, and the small port of Baracoa, have also
  a considerable trade in wax, which is gathered in
  the uncleared portions of the country. The vicinity
  of the sugar plantations destroys many bees, for they
  become drunken with the refuse of the sugar kettles
  and the molasses, of which they are very fond. In
  general, the production of wax declines as the lands
  are brought under cultivation.
294
                           humboldt’b ouba.
                       CHAPTER X.
                          COMMERCE.
       Causes of its importance—Wealth of Cuba—Relation of Havana to
       Spanish-America—Present state of commerce—Official valuations
       (Note)—Fallacies of tables of trade—Remarks thereon—
       Balanza de Comercio—Imports and exports, 1810 and 1823-
       Character of imports—Of exports—Merchant ships and men-of-
       war at Havana—[Note.—Imports and exports. 1852—Character
       of imports, and proportion from United States—Exports—Propor-
       tion to the United States—Vessels entered and cleared—Propor-
       tion of commerce of Havana.]—Reflections on the character of
       importations—Large amount of woven fabrics—Of provisions and
       liquors—State of society, and want of subsistence—Mines and
       cereals a necessity—Surprising importation of meats and pulse—
       Probable future deduced—Error of the deduction (JVW<?)—Evil
       colonial policy of Europe—Not adapted to Cuba—Probable
       ^ increase of population—Social theory—Law of public welfare
       and of future of Cuba-—[Note.—Error of social theory demon-
       strated by Jamaica—Transition of blacks from slavery to freedom
       —Its sad results—Tendency of free negroes to abandon the fields
       —Natural results—Sustains Baron Humboldt’s law of public
       welfare and of future of Cuba.]—Flour trade—Mexican competi-
       tion—State of public wealth in 1800—Its increase—Cuban defence
       of free trade—Influence of commerce upon society—Progress not
       to be measured by tons—Lives of nations.
        It has been already stated, in the beginning of
      this work, that the importance of the commerce of
                                                            COMMERCE.
295
  Cuba does not arise solely from the wealth of its
  products, nor from its demand for the wares and
  fabrics of Europe; but that this importance is based,
  in part, upon the admirable situation of the port of
  Havana, at the entrance of the Mexican Gulf, and
  immediately where the great routes of the commer-
  cial nations of both worlds cross each other. Tile
  Abbe Raynal has said, at a time when its agricul-
  ture contributed, in sugar and coffee, barely two
  millions to the commerce of the world, “ The island
  of Cuba alone may be worth a kingdom to Spain’.”
  These memorable words have been, in some
  degree, prophetic., and since she has lost Mexico,
  Peru, and so many other States that have attained
  their independence, they should be seriously pon-
  dered by the statesmen who may guide the political
  interests of Spain. The island of Cuba, to which
  the court of Madrid has long since conceded great
  freedom of trade, exports, through licit and illicit
  channels, its own productions of sugar, coffee,
  tobacco, wax, and hides, to the amount of fourteen
  millions of dollars at the present time (1825). This
  is only one-third less than that of Mexico at the
  time of her greatest mining prosperity. It may be
  said, that Havana and Vera Cruz are to the rest of
  America, what Hew York is to the United States.
  The tonnage of the thousand or twelve hundred
  merchant ships that annually arrive at the port of
296
                            HUMBOLDT'S CUBA.
       Havana, amounts (exclusive of the smaller craft
       engaged in the coasting trade) to 150,000 or 170,000-
       tons. We also see, even in a time of peace, from
       120 to 150 vessels of war touching annually at that
       port.
         From 1815 to 1819 the value of the products
       registered at the custom-house of Havana alone
       (sugar, rum, molasses, coffee, wax, and hides),
       amounted to $11,245,000, one year with another.
       In 1823, the value of her exports, returned at less
       than two-thirds of their actual prices (and exclusive
       of $1,179,000 in coin), has exceeded the sum of
       $12,500,000. It is more than probable that the
       imports of the whole island, licit" and contraband,
       estimated at the actual value of the goods and the
       slaves, amount, at the present time, to fifteen or six-
       teen millions of dollars, of which barely three or
       four millions are re-exported.1 Havana purchases
         1 The official returns of the value of cxportB and imports in Cuba,
       in 1851 and 1852, are as follows:
                                  Import*.    Export*.       Exports In Bond,
             1851 ............ $34,042,749    $38,054,888  $1,713,085
             1852 .............. 30,828,711    28,602,912   1,148,975
         In these returns the rates of valuation for exports arc, for sugar
       3tJ cents per pound; molasses $6£ a hhd, (about 5 cents a gallon);
       rum 1G cents a gallon; cofTee i cents a pound; sugars $4 a thou-
       sand ; leaf tobacco (i and 12J cents a pound; copper ore $2 50per
       quintal.
                                                                        COMMlvliCK.
297
   in foreign marts much larger quantities of goods
   than are needed for her own consumption, exchang-
   ing her colonial products for the fabrics of Europe,
   and selling them again at Vera Cruz, Truxillo,
   Laguaira, and Carthagena.
     I have examined in another work, fifteen years
   since, the basis upon which are founded the tables
   published “under the fallacious title of Balmzas
   Comercio/” and I stated then liow little confidence
   can be reposed in these pretended accounts between
   nations making mutual exchanges, the advantages of
   which it is believed can only be appreciated, under
   a false principle of political economy, by the amount
   of balances paid in coin. The following statistics
   will exhibit two years from the                and
   dos de         Comercio, arranged  by order of the govern-
   ment. I have altered none of the figures, for they
   present (and this is a great advantage in treating of
   quantities which are difficult to estimate) the mini-
   mum amounts.
     The values stated in these tables, are neither the
   actual values of the articles at the place of produc-
   tion, nor those of the markets of sale; but they
   are fictitious valuations, official values, as they are
   termed in the custom-house system of Great Britain,
   that is to say (and I shall never tire of repeating it),
   one-tliird less than the current prices. In order to
                                         13*
        208 .             humboldt’s  cuba.
        ascertain, with the tables of the trade of Havana as
        given by the Spanish custom-houses, the commerce
        of the whole island, we should require tables of the
        returns of imports and exports from all the other
        ports, and add to the sum total the amount of fraudu-
        lent trade, which varies with different places, and
        to know the nature of goods and the changes in their
        prices from year to year. Such estimates can only
        be made by the local authorities; and the matter
        that has been published by these, in the struggle
        with the Spanish Cortes which they have main-
        tained with so much ability, proves that they do
        not deem themselves sufficiently prepared for a labor
        which embraces so many objects at the same time.
          The Junta de Gobierno and the Real
        publish annually, under the title of Bala/nza de Com-
        ereio, tables of the custom-house returns of exports
        and imports through the port of*Ilavana alone;1 in
        which a distinction is drawn between the imports in
        Spanish and foreign vessels, the exports for Spain, for
        Spanish ports in America, and for ports not under
        the dominion of the 'Spanish crown. The weight or
        measure of the merchandise, its official value, and
        the royal and municipal duties are also expressed;
          1 Although I possess a large number of these, I only publish in
        this work the figures which are absolutely necessary to guide us to
        general results.—II.
                                                             COMMERCE,
299
   but the official estimates of the prices of goods, as
   we have before stated, are much below their market
   value.1
IMPORTS.
1816. 1828.                                          
Spanish vessels---                                   
Fabrics and merchandise,.   ..$1,032,135             
African slaves,..........   .. 2,659,950   No slaves 
Gold and silver,.........   .. 2,288,358   reported. 
                            5,980,443 •  $ 3,562,227 
foreign vessels,...........               10,136,538 
Total,......:..........'    .$13,219,968 $13,968,735 
EXPORTS.                                             
Spanish vessels---                                   
For Spain,.............     ..$2,419,424             
Spanish ports in America,   .. 2,104,890             
Coast of Africa,.........   .. 643,852               
                            5,267,960     $3,560,312 
Foreign vessels,.........   .. 3,195,169   8,778,857 
Total,...............       ,.$8,363,138 $12,329,169 
     1 For example, each negro is valued at $150, and each barrel of
   flour at $10. After expressing the total amounts of fallacious
   balanzas de comercio, I have indicated the sums of gold and silver
   which have passed through Cuba. In order to give an approximate
   idea of the domestic consumption of the island, and its requirements
   of European manufactures, I have stated the quantity of the same
   articles imported and re-exported.—H.
       300             humboldt’s ouba.
         The custom-house returns of gold and silver
       exported in 1816, amount to $480,840, and in 1823,
       to $1,179,034 imported, and $1,404,584 exported.
       Among the imports and exports, we find the follow-
       ing articles:
1810.                         1823.
—*------------, ,----------------*--------—>
                                Imported. Re-exported,  Imported. Re-exported. 
Flour (bbls.),.................    71,807       10,965     74,119     ---      
Wines and liquors from Europe, $ 468,067    111,466     1,119,437    49,286    
Halt meats and provisions,. „.. 1,096,791   227,274    ---        --           
Manufactured clothing,......      127,681        4,825    218,226     ---      
Linen goods,................    3,226,859    1,529,610  2,071,088    29,526    
Woolen u .....,                   108,224                                      
Cotton “ ................                     ---       1,021,807    69,049    
Furniture, glass ware, &c.,....   267,312    29,000       404,828    8,046     
Paper,.......................   61,846       20,496       158,887    22,288    
Iron ware,...................     880,868    99,581       288,697    63,149    
Hides and skins,,,...........    185, lu8          --- ---        ---          
Lumber and wooden ware,....       285,217          ---    858,765    28,458    
Rice (lbs.),................... ---           ---       7,746,025 ---          
Lard <keg9),.................   ---                --- 89,948     ---          
Jerked beef (lbs.),............ ---           ---      10,788,600 ---          
          The products of the island exported were as
        folllows.
                  1816.          1823. 
Sugar,..........               300,211 
Coffee,..........              895,925 
Wax,...........       “ 22,365  15,962 
Molasses,........ .... Hhds. -  30,145 
Leaf tobacco,----               13,879 
Segars,..........               71,108 
                                                           COMMERCE.
301
     .The most exact data I have been able to obtain,
   relative to the arrivals and departures of vessels at
   the port of Havana, are the following:
Arrivals, 1799..... ,... 883    1802..  ...... 845   
          1800....  .... 784    1803.,  .......1,020 
          1801....  .... 1,015                       
  Average from 1815 to 1819, .                       
                    Merchant vessels.   Men-of-war.  
                       Arrived. Sailed.   Arrived.   
    1820.                       1,230       ---      
     1821           ... 1,208   1,168        95      
     1822           ... 1,182   1,118       141      
    1823,           ... 1,168   1,144       149      
    1824.           ... 1,080   1,088       129      
[Note.---In order      that the reader    may see,   
   glance, the progress and present state of the com-
   merce of Cuba, we insert here the results exhibited
   in the Balanza de Comercio of 1852.
                                                                              IMPORTS.
         In 947 Spanish vessels,......
           2,(i05 Foreign “    .........
           3,012
                                                                              EXPORTS.
         In 819 Spanish vessels..........
         “ 2,455 Foreign **    ..........
           3,274
         Imports in bond.................
         Exports (t <{    ............
$20,325,751
   9,454,491
$29,780,242
                                                                                     $ 7,018,018
                                                                                     20,435,919
                                                                                      27,453,937
                                                                                     .$1,048,469
                                                                                     . 1,148,975
      'SO2                  uumboldt’s ouba.
        The Importations for domestic consumption are
       lassed as follows:—
 Total. From U. States.
Cotton Goods..........                     . $2,661,568 $144,552  
Linen u .........                             . 2,431,564 75,580  
Woolen “ ........                                 359,060 15,663  
Silk “ .........                                . 598,747 64,193  
Manufactures of Leather                           635,374 38,663  
Meats................                        . 1,909,394 161,950  
Fish..... ............                           668,425 152,171  
Wines and Liquors.....                       .' 2,563,303 64,433  
Flour.................                   . 4,084,286 91,714       
Rice.................                    . 1,046,604 811,462      
Grain and Pulse.......                     . 320,212 115,991      
Spices and Fruits ......                     397,439 22,469       
Other Provisions........                 . 1,400,005 287,900      
Lard and Butter.......                       948,144 902,635      
Lumber...............                        2,042,187 1,864,997  
Metals and Iron ware....                 . 2,476,106 201.469      
Soap.................                    . 681,068   64,624       
Other Manufactures.....                  . 3,936,274 958,200      
Live Stock.............                    40,206    9,157        
Material for Railroads and Sugar Mills.    680,276   269,223      
Specie.................                  . 989,424   532,468      
                                EXPORTS. $29,780,242. $6,849,614  
                                  Total.      To U. States.       
Sugar.........              .$20,153,002  $8,940,050              
Molasses......,             .. 1,603,929     978,687              
Rum..........                    229,437      11,580              
Carry forward                $21,986,368  $9,930,317              
COMMERCE.
                                                               303
 Total.             To U. States.
Brought forward $21,986,368  ■ $9,930,317 
Coffee.........      739,369      138,901 
Segars........       764,414      353,945 
Leaf Tobacco...  . 1,001,166      274,316 
Copper Ore ....      945,532       39,080 
Other Products.  . 2,017,088    1,339,850 
                 $27,453,937  $12,076,409 
   The United States supplied 23 per cent, of the
imports, and received 47 per cent, of the exports.
The exportation of the principal staples is thus
 stated:—
                                Total. To U. States.
    Sugar............Boxes 1,409,012 638,678 or 44 per cent.
    Molasses.........Ilhds.     262,593   156,590 “ 61    “
    Rum...............Pipes      11,359       679 “  6    “
      Coffee.........Arrobes    739,339   138,901 “ 19
    Segars...........M.         180,610    84,887 “ 46    “
    Leaf Tobacco.....Qqls. ,     97,374    27,711 “ 27    “
    Copper Ore.......   “ •     381,470    16,632 “  4    «
   Of the 3,012 vessels entered, 1,886 were Ameri-
can, and of the 3,274 cleared, 1,644 were American.
Tonnage entered 622,016 tons.
   Of the imports 74 per cent., and of the exports
44 per cent, were through the port of Havana.]
                     When we compare in these tables the great value
                     of the importations with the small value of the
304
UUMBOLDT’s CUBA.
       goods re-exported, wo are surprised to find how
       great is the domestic consumption of a country,
       containing only 325,000 white, and 130,000 free
       colored population. Estimating the several articles
       at their current prices, we find a consumption of
       two and a half or three millions of dollars in linen
       goods, one million in cotton goods, four hundred
       thousand in silks, and two hundred and twenty
       thousand m woolen goods. The demand of Cuba,
       through the port of Havana alone, for the woven
       fabrics of Europe, has exceeded four, or four and a
       half millions of dollars yearly, for the last few years.
       To these imports at Havana, through licit channels,
       we must add for furniture, glass ware, &c., &c. -
       $500,000; iron ‘ and steel, $380*,000; lumber,
       $400,000; and castile soap, $300,000.
         The importations of provisions and liquors at
       Havana, seem to me, worthy the attention of those
       who wish to ascertain the true social state of those
       communities called the sugar colonies. Such is the
       composition of society in those communities, inha-
       biting the most fertile soil that Nature has offered to
       the use of man; such the direction of agricultural
       labor and industry in the Antilles, that in the bene-
       ficent climate of the tropics the people would fail to
       obtain subsistence, if it were not for the freedom and
       activity of their foreign commerce.
                                                            COMMERCE.
■305
     I will not refer to the wines imported at Havana,
   which amounted (according to the custom-house
   returns, he it remembered) to 40,000 barrels ill 1803,
   and in 1823 to 15,000 pipes, valued at $1,200,000;
   nor to the 6,000 barrels of brandies, &c., from
   Spain and Holland ; nor to the 113,000 barrels of
   flour. These wines, these liquors, and this flour, to
   the value of $3,300,000, are consumed only by the
   better classes of the people. The cereals of the
   United States have become a real and true necessity,
   under a zone where for a long time, maize, yuca,
   and the plantain were preferred to any other kind of
   food. Amid the always-increasing enlightenment
   of Havana, we may not lament the development of
   a luxury that is purely European. But alongside of
   the flour, wines, and liquors of Europe we find, in
   1816, a million, and in 1823, three and a half mil-
   lions of dollars in salted mea, rice, and (dried pulse.
   During the last named year, the importation of rice
   (in Havana alone, and by the custom-house returns,
   exclusive of contraband), has been 8,075,000 pounds
   (in 1852, in all the island, 20,940,925 pounds), that
   of salted and dried meats, the tasajo (jerked beef),
   so necessary for the support of the slaves, 11,625,000
   pounds (in all the island, in 1852,41,750,450 pounds).
                       This absence of the means of subsistence character-
                       izes that part of the tropical regions where the unwise
306
humboldt’s cuba.
       activity of the European has inverted the order of
       nature. It will diminish as the inhabitants become
       better'aware of their true interests, and disheartened
       at the low prices of colonial products, and they will
       then vary the staples of their production, and give
       an impulse to all the branches of rural economy.1
          The principles of the limited and mean policy
       which guides the rulers of small islands (workshops,
       in fact, dependent upon Europe, and inhabited by
       men who abandon the country as soon as they
       become sufficiently wealthy), can never harmonize
       with a country nearly as large in extent as England,
       filled with populous cities, and whose inhabitants,
       descending from father to son for centuries, far from
       deeming themselves strangers upon American soil,
       hold for it the same affection that every one
       entertains for his native land.
         1 The study and development of the true principles of Political
       Economy, during the last quarter of a century, have demonstrated
       the reverse of this theory of material interests. It is now generally
       admitted that the labor ?tnd capital of a country 'are most wisely
       employed in the production of those staples for which its climate
       and soil are best adapted. In this manner, through the interchanges
       of a free trade, the wants of the community are supplied with the
       least expenditure of labor, and a larger portion of its produced
       wealth is left in tbe form of capital, to be re-applicd to production. It
       is this combination of agriculture and commerce that has been the
       source of the great material prosperity of Cuba.
                                                           COMMERCE.
307
   The population of the island of Cuba, which per-
haps, may increase within fifty yeav6 to a million,
may open to itself, through its own wants, an
immense field to native industry.
   Though the slave-trade should cease, and the
slaves pass slowly to the condition of freemen, and
society attain the power of self-government, without
being exposed to the violent fluctuations of civil
commotion, it would continue upon the path
marked out by nature for every numerous and intel-
ligent community. The cultivation of sugar and
coffee would not, therefore, be abandoned, but like
that of cochineal in Mexico, of indigo in Guatemala,
and of cocoa in Venezuela, it would cease to be the
principal basis of national existence. An intelligent
and free agricultural people would succeed a slave
population that is without foresight or industry.
Tire capital which the commerce of Havana has
poured into the hands of the agriculturists during
the last fifteen years, is already beginning to change
the face of the country, and to this efficient power,
whose action is always increasing, there would
necessarily be added another—the development of
humaii knowledge, which is inseparable from the
progress of industry and of national wealth. On
the union of these two great springs of action depends
the future fate of the metropolis of the Antilles.
         308               humboldt’b  Cuba.
           [Note.—The error of the social theory here stated
         has been demonstrated by the sad experience of
         Jamaica. The change in the condition of the blacks
         in that island was made in accordance with the
         requisites here laid down, as far as it wa6 possible to
         accord with them. The transition of the slaves to
         the condition of freemen was gradual, and the amal-
         gamated community attained the right of self-govern-
         ment without the violent fluctuations of civil com-
         motion ; yet it has been found that an intelligent and
         free agricultural people did not succeed the slave
         population; that the numbers and influence of the
         intelligent white population have steadily and
         rapidly decreased, and threaten to become wholly
         extinct; that the freed negroes are relapsing from
         the semi-intelligent state they had attained under the
         rule of the whites, and are retrograding toward bar-
         barism; that the supply of agricultural labor, and
         consequently, the product of agriculture, has largely
         diminished; that commerce has dwindled away;
         and that the social oondition of the blacks has sunk
         to an unhappy prevalence of sloth, misery, and
         want.
           Co-existent with this decline in the material
         welfare of the inhabitants of Jamaica, a decline in
         their moral condition has been experienced. Religion
         has waned; churches have been closed; schools
                                                           COMMERCE.
309
have fallen into decay; the ministers of the gospel
have fled the country; the rite of marriage is falling
into disuse; the social position of woman has been
degraded; and vice and crime have become, in a
measure, natural to the state of society among the
mass of negroes. The statistics of population in
Cuba, which we have already examined, demonstrate
the same tendency of the free blacks there to
abandon the labors of agriculture, and to congregate
in the towns. The cultivation of the fields being
thus diminished, commerce, which is the handmaiden
of agriculture, must decline also, and with this dimi-
nution ceases the accession of capital, which commerce
brings to the agriculturist.
   In these sad facts, we recognize the truth of the
social law laid down by Baron Humboldt: that “the
development of human knowledge is insepafable
from the progress of industry and of national
wealthand we must also admit his deduction,
that the future fate of Cuba depends upon the main-
tenance of her industry, and the increase of her
national wealth, which shall continue to extend the
magic influence of capital over her fields, and stim-
ulate the development of knowledge among the
people.]
   The custom-house returns of flour imported at
        310             humboldt’s ouba.
        Havana alone, in 1823, was 113,506 barrels, which,
        at the average price of $16 50, inclusive of the
        duties, amounts to $1,864,500. The first direct im-
        portation of flour from the United States is due to
        the wise administration of Don Luis de las Casas.
        Before his time, it could only be imported after
        having been carried to a port in Europe. Mr. Rob-
        inson (Mem. on the                 Mexica/n , vol. 2, p.
        330) estimates the importation of flour into Cuba,
        through licit and illicit channels, at 120,000 barrels.
        He adds, which seems to me less certain, “ that the
        island of Cuba, in consequence of the evil distribu-
        tion of slave labor there, could barely sustain a
        blockade of five months.” In 1822, there were
        imported from the United States 144,980 barrels,
        valued in Havana, inclusive of the duties, at
        $2,391,000.
          [In 1852, the total importation of flour into Cuba
        was 327,950 barrels, of which but 7,610 were from
        the United States; total value, at the mean selling
        price of $16 50, $5,411,175.]
                          Notwithstanding that the flour of the United
                          . States is burdened with an impost of seven dollars
                          a barrel, yet that of Spain—Santander, for instance
                                                            COMMERCE.
311
 —cannot compete with it.1 A competition was
begun by Mexico, under the most favorable circum-
stances; for, during my residence at Yera Cruz,
Mexican flour was already exported from there to
the value of three hundred thousand dollars; and
this had increased, in 1809, to 70,000 barrels, as is
shown by the statement of Mr. Pitkins. The politi-
cal disturbances of Mexico have entirely destroyed
this trade in cereals, between two countries both
situate under the torrid zone, but at different eleva-
tions above the level of the sea, which exerts a
powerful influence upon climate and production.
   As a complement to these statements regarding
the foreign trade of Cuba, let us listen to the author
of an essay we have repeatedly cited, who sets forth
the true ■ situation of the island. “ Havana begins
already to experience the effects of an accumulation
of wealth, for provisions have doubled in price,
within a few years, and the wages of labor are so
increased, that a newly imported African, without
having learned any trade, earns by the labor of his
hands from 50 to 62£ cents a day; and a negro
mechanic, however rough his work, earns from 02} to
   1 The duty on flour imported from the United States is now nearly
eleven dollars a barrel, ami is an efficient protection to that of
Santander.
         312               humbolbt’s Cuba.
         75 cents a day. The patrician families remain in the
         country, and those who become rich do not return to
         Europe. There are families which are very wealthy:
         Don Mateo Pedroso, who died a short time since,
         left in land alone more than two millions of dollars.
         The trade which is transacted yehrly in that market
         amounts to more than twenty millions.”—De la
         situation presente de Cuba.—MSS,
            Such was the state of public wealth at the close -
         of the year 1800. Since then, tventy-five years of
         constantly increasing prosperity have elapsed, and
         the population has nearly doubled. Previous to
         1800, the returns of the export of sugar did not
         reach 170,000 boxes; now (1825) it always exceeds
         200,000  boxes, and has attained 250,000, and even
         300,000. [In 1852, it exceeded11,400,000 boxes.] A
         new branch of industry has been created in the coffee
         culture, the export of which shows a value of three
         and a halt* millions of dollars. Industry, directed
         by better knowledge, has attained better results, and
         the system of imposts that bore heavily upon it, and
         weighed down foreign trade, was changed in the
         year 1791, and has been subsequently improved by
         successive alterations.
            Whenever the mother country, ignoring her true
         interests, has wished to take a retrograde step, a
         thousand clamors, each louder than the other, have
                                                            COMMERCE.
313
   come up, not only from the people of Havana, but
   frequently also from Spanish executive officers, in
   defence of the freedom of trade in America. Through
   the enlightened zeal aud patriotic views of the inten-
   dant, Don Claudio Martinez Pinillos, another step
   has been recently taken, favoring the employment
   of capital, in conceding to Havana a warehousing
   system or trade in bond, under the most favorable
   auspices.
     In Havana, as everywhere, where commerce and
   its consequent wealth experience a rapid increase,
   the evil influence it exercises over ancient customs
   is complained of. This is not the place to compare
   the former state of Cuba, covered with pasture
   before its capture by the English, and its present
   state, when it has become the metropolis of the
   Antilles; neither will we weigh the frankness and
   simplicity of the customs of a nascent society, with
   those which appertain to a more advanced civiliza-
   tion. A love of wealth springs from the spirit of
   commerce, and as a necessary consequence, the
   mass contemns whatever cannot be obtained with
   money; but it is the good fortune of human affairs,
   that whatever is most worthy of being desired, most
   noble and most free in man, we owe only to the
   inspirations of the soul, and to the improvement of
   our intellectual faculties.
                           14
Humboldt’s cuba.
                                                             314
         If the pursuit of wealth should pervade tb an
       absolute degree all classes of society, it would infal-
       libly produce the evil that is deplored by those who
       contemplate with sorrow what they style the prepon-
       derance of the industrial system. But the increase
       of commerce—multiplying the friendly ties between
       nations, opening an immense sphere to the opera-
       tions of the mind, pouring capital into the lap of
       agriculture, and creating new wants through the
       refinements of luxury—presents in itself the remedy
       for the danger which they believe to exist. In this
       extreme complication of cause and effect, time is
       needed to establish th’e equilibrium between the dif-
       ferent classes of society. We cannot say, at any
       given period, that civilization, the progress of know-
       ledge, and the development of the public mind,
       may be measured by tons, by the value of exports,
       or by the state of the industrial arts. Nations, like
       individuals, should not be judged by a single period
       of their lives, for they must run the entire course of
       their destiny, passing through the whole scale of a
       civilization adequate to their physical condition, and
       consonant with their national character.
              INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
315
                  CHAPTER XI.
              INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
 Projected canal from Havana to Batabano—Survey and levels—
   Difficulty of making roads—Estimated cost and advantages of the
   Canal—[Note.—Present state of roads—Itinerary of principal
   roads—Cross-roads—Turnpikes—Introduction of railroads—Their
   adaptability to Cuba—Government determines to build the first—
   Its immense cost—Receipts and expenses—Sale and extension-
   present system of railroads—-Existing railroads in Cuba—Tbeir
   cost—Receipts—Steam navigation—Coasting trade—Shipbuilding
   —Telegraph.]
   Tub laborious and costly means of internal com-
munication in Cuba, increase the cost of her
products in her ports, notwithstanding the short
distance between the northern and southern shore.
A projected canal, which shall combine the advan-
tages of uniting Havana with Batabano, and dimin-
ish, at the same time, the expense of transportation
to the native products, is worthy of special mention
here. The idea of the Guinea caual was conceived
more than half a century since, for the single pur-
pose of supplying the Navy-yard of Havana with
816
humboldt’s cuba.
           aliip timber at a moderate price., In 1796 Count
           Jarnco y Mopox, an estimable and enterprising gen-
           tleman, who possessed great influence at court
           through his intimacy with the Prince of the Peace,
           undertook the revival of tlris project, and in 1798-
           the survey was made by two engineers of great
           merit,1 Don Francisco and Don Felix Lemaiir, who
           found that the length of the canal would be nineteen
           leagues, of live thousand varas each ; that the high-
           est point was at the Tavema del Key, and that
           nineteen locks on the' northern slope, and twenty-one
           on the southern, would be required. In a direct
           line there are only eight and one-third maritime
           leagues, from Havana to Batabano. The canal of
           Guines, even as a canal for the smaller navigation,
           would be of great utility in tlie transportation of
           agricultural products by steam vessels, for it would
           pass through the most highly cultivated lands.
              In no part of the world do the roads become more
           impassable during the rainy season, than in that part
           of the island, where the soil is a decomposing lime-
           stone ill adapted to the making of wheel-roads.
           The transportation of sugar from Giiines to Havana,
             1 This survey gave the following elevations in Burgos feet;
           Cerro, near the bridge of the Zanja, 100.2; Taverna del Key,
           329.3 ; town of Rincon, 295.3; lagoon of Zaldivar, when filled up,
           237.3; Quiviean, 100.1 ; Village of Batabano, 21.3.—H.
                                               INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
317
f.?:-
    a distance of twelve leagues, costs now one dollar a
    quintal. Besides the advantages that would accrue
    to the internal communications, the canal would give
    great importance to the roadstead of Batabano,
    which could be available to small vessels laden with
    jerked beef from Venezuela, which would thus
    avoid doubling Cape San Antonio. In the stormy
    season, and iu time of war, when privateers are
    cruising between Cape Catoche, the Tortugas, and
    Mariel, it would be advantageous to shorten the
    voyage from the Spanish main to Cuba, by arriving,
    not at Havana, but at some port on the south side of
    island.
      In 1796 the probable cost of the Giiines canal was
    estimated at a million, or one million two hundred
    thousand dollars; we may suppose it would now
    cost a million and a half of dollars. ' The products
    that might pass annually through the canal have
    been estimated at 75,000 boxes of sugar, 25,000
    arrobes of coffee, and 8,000 lihds. of molasses and
    rum. In the first project, that of 1796, it was
    intended to connect the 'canal with the Giiines
    brook, running it from the Ilolanda sugar estate
    towards Quivican, three leagues south of Bejucal
    and Santa Rosa. Tins idea has now been aban-
    doned, as the Guines brook loses its water toward
    the east, in the irrigation of the savannas of Guana-
         318              humboldt’s  con a.             >
         mon. Instead of leading tho canal east of the
         Cerro village, and south of the castle of Atares to
         the hay itself, the intention was to avail of the bed
         of the Chorrera or Almendares river, from Oalaba-
         zal to Ilusillo, and thence to follow the royal zanja;
         thus bringing the vessels into the suburbs and city of
         Havana, and at the same time, supplying the foun-
         tains with water, of which they are now deprived
         during three months of the year. I have had the
         pleasure of visiting, in company with Messieurs
         Lemaur, the country through which this line of navi-
         gation should pass. The utility of the project i9
         undeniable, if, in a time of great drought, a suffi-
         cient supply of water can be brought to the divid-
         ing point.
           [Note.—The projected canal was never con-
         structed, but the facilities for internal communica-
         tion in Cuba have largely increased since the time
         of Baron Humboldt’s writing, and a short sketch of
         their present condition will not be inappropriate in
         a view of the actual condition of the island. The
         old system of highways, which is still in use, is a
         series of roads upon which very little labor has
         been expended, and during the rainy season travel-
         ling on them is exceedingly laborious. The princi-
         pal road running east from Havana, is the great
                 INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.          319
    highway through the island, and the mail is still
    carried over it on horseback. Its principal points
    are, to Matauzas, 21 leagues ;* thence to Villa Clara,
    57 1.; to Santi Espiritu, 23 1.; to Puerto Principe,
    50 1.; to Las Tuna9, 311.; to Bayamo, 14 1.; to St.
    Jago de Cuba, 341.; to Santa Catalina, 25 1.; to
    Baracoa, 44 1.; total, 299 leagues. Two roads run
    west from Havana (the Central and the South Shore
    roads), to Pinar del Rio, 45 1.; and thence to Guane,
    151.; and to Mantua, 6 leagues. Total, 06 leagues.
    Another road runs west from Havana, along the
    northern shore, to Maricl, 14 leagues; thence to
    Cabanas, 5 1.; to Bahia Honda, 6 1.; and thence to
    Mantua. The southern road runs from Havana to
    Guinea, 12 leagues; thence to Cienfuegos, 57 1.; and
    to Trinidad, 211.; total, 90 leagues.
      There are also, a common road along the northern
    side, highways across the island in several places,
    as from Matanzas to Cienfuegos; from Sagua to
    Cienfuegos, through Villa Clara; Remedios to Trini-
    dad, through Villa Clara; Moron to Santi Espiritu
    and • Saza; Hnevitas, through Puerto Principe, to
    Santa Cruz; Gibara to Holguin, Bayamo, and
    Manzanillo: and others between the larger towns.
    Besides these principal roads, there are numerous
    cross country roads, and innumerable paths, used by
    tho country people. Of all these roads, we may
320
nuMnoiWs cuha.
         observe generally, that in the Western department
       they are fair, in the Central poor, and in the
       Eastern impracticable for ■wheel-carriages. The
       common roads are little more than open portions of
       country, left for public transit, and being without
       grading.or repair of any kind upon them, partake of
       the qualities of the land where they may be located.
       In places hilly, stony, and dangerous, in others, they
       have a deep alluvial soil, intransitable except in the
       dry season. Travelling is, therefore, a matter of no
       little trouble and delay, and the consequent small,
       number of travellers enables Cuba to dispense with
       those, in other countries, necessary institutions,
       hotels and taverns ; and their absence has given rise
       to that generous country hospitality so often noted by
       tourists in Cuba.
         Many years since, a turnpike'system was devised,
      to extend over the most populous portions of the
      island, but the great labor and expense of construct-
      ing roads sufficiently stable to resist the heavy rains
      of th6 tropics, made the progress of these very slow.
      A few short ones have been constructed in the
      vicinity of Havana, and are still being extended.
      The principal turnpike runs, west from Havana 12
      leagues to Guanajay. The southern turnpike extends
      to Santiago de las Vegas 5 leagues; the southeastern
      is finished for a distance of 7^ leagues, and the
                                             INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
321
  eastern, 5 leagues from Havana. They are con-
  structed by the Junta, de Foment*), with funds
  appropriated mostly by the government from the
  general revenue.
     To Don Eduardo Fesser, a private gentleman of
  Havana, belongs the honor of having first drawn
  public attention in Cuba to the railroads for internal
  communication. With unwearied exertion he pro-
  cured and presented, in a well-digested form, the
  fullest and most satisfactory information on the sub-
  ject, and succeeded in establishing a joint stock
  company for the purpose of carrying his plans into
  execution. Experience has fully demonstrated the
  great adaptability of this system of internal commu-
  nication to the wants of Cuba. The difficulty and
  great expense of building and keeping in repair
  good common roads, under the in ter tropical torrent
  rains, and the facilities afforded by the face of the
  country for building railroads without deep cuts,
  tunnels, or heavy grades, makes their cost compara-
  tively small, while the practicability of constructing
  short stretches inland, from the harbors, and their
  becoming immediately profitable, has been favorable
  to their extension. Die wealth and production of
  the Western department are now in a great measure
  concentrated upon Havana by a well-devised system
  of railroads.
14*
322
humboldt’s ouba.
        At the eleventh hour, the Spanish authorities
      determined to reserve to themselves the honor of
      building the first railroad, and M. Fesser and his
      company were set aside. A loan of two and-a-half
      millions of dollars was obtained in England, the •
      Junta    do Fomento   contributed $40,000 annually
      from its funds, the government loaned
      and convicts as laborers, and the road from Havana
      to Guines was built. It was commenced in 1835,
      and opened to Bejucal, 17 miles, in November
      1837, and finally to Guines, 44£ miles, in December
      1839.
                              The building of this road is an instructive example
                              of the manner in which public works are earned on
      by the Spanish authorities in Cuba. Don Pio Pita
      Pizarro, who was finance minister in Spain in 1839,
      states in his work on the treasury and national debt
      of that country, published in Madrid in 1840, that
      the total cost of the Guines road was $3,909,625 75,
      being $87,366 per mile, for a single track, and
      including the cost of equipment, stations, &c., about
      $95,000 a mile. The government retained the road
      for three years, during which its receipts were as
       follows:—
                                                                                Passengers,
                1839 .....$171,791
                1840 ..... 172,611
                1841 ..... 168,167
  Freight.      Total.
$136,484        $308,275
  173,509        346,120
  181,963        350,140
                                             INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
323
     The expenditures have not been published, but
   Sehor Pizarro, in the work above referred to, states
   that it required an annual outlay of $441,561 to
   meet the oxpenses of the road. The government
   accordingly determined to sell it, and in 1842 trans-
   ferred it to a private company that assumed the
   loan, and engaged to extend the lines. This they
   have since done to Union, 33£ miles further, where
   it meets the Matanzas road, and have also con-
   structed branches to Guanajay, 21 miles, and Bata-
   bano, 10 miles.
     This road, which is the great trunk of the railway
   system in, Cuba, runs from Havana in a south direc-
   tion to San Felipe, 26 miles, where it bends to the
   east through Gaines to Union. At Rincon, 14 miles
   from Havana, the Guanajay branch commences
   running westward to San Antonio, where it turns
   toward the north, and at Guanajay it is only six
   miles from Mariel, on the northern shore of the
   island. The Matanzas road has a general south
   course to Union, where it turns to the east, extend-
   ing through Navajas to Isabel, 25 miles further.
   The Cardenas road runs south to Bomba, 18 miles,
   where it bends to the southwest, extending to Hava-,
   jas, 11 miles—connecting there with the Matanzas
   road. It has a branch from Bemba, running south-
   east to Agiiica, 33£ miles, which it is contemplated
       324              humboldt’s cuba.
       to extend eastward, through the centre of the island,
     to Villa Clara. The Cienfuegos road runs north-
     ward, to, Cruces, 18 miles, and is being extended to
     Villa Clara, 18 miles further, where it will connect
     with the Cardenas road, and through it with the
     Havana' system. The Coliseo road runs eastward
     < from Matanzas to within a few leagues of Cardenas.
     The Jucaro road runs southeast from Cardenas into
     what is now the richest sugar district of Cuba.
     Several other roads are in contemplation, in order to
     extend the connections of this system both east and
     west.
         The following are the existing roads in Cuba, with
       their length in English miles:
               Havana, with two branches,................... 108J-
               Rcgla to Guanabacoa,............................ 2$
               Matanzas,.....................................   47
               Coliseo......................................... 24
               Cardenas, with one branch,..................... 021
               Jucaro, with one branch,........................ 34
               Cienfuegos,..................................... 18
               Remcdios,........................................ 6
               Trinidad to Casilda,............................. 3
               Puerto Principe to Nuevitas,.................... 46
               Cobre to St. Jago,............................ 9
                      Total,................................. 360J-
          We have stated the cost of the road built by the
                                              INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.
325
   government, but that is no criterion for the cost of
   railroads in Cuba—those built by private enterprise
   having been equally well constructed, at a much less
   expense.. The road from Cardenas to Kavajas cost
   something less than $28,000 per mile, and the Jucaro
   road about $20,000 per mile, exclusive of running
   equipment.1               •
      The receipts of the principal of these roads,
   according to the latest data in our possession, is as
follows:                                                     
                         1850.                 1851.         
   Road. Length.  Passengers. Freight.  Passengers. Freight. 
Havana, .. 108£    $293,300 $377,209       $336,076 $454,961 
Matanzas, , 47           75,876 228,266      87,239 288,782  
• Coliseo,... 24         16,691 105,659      13,333 128,526  
Cardenas, . 62J          32,070 158,374      61,695 258,378  
Jucaro,... 34            14,088 291,641     - 9,103 261,544  
Itemcdios,. C (opened April, 1851),...   ... 16,905 22,877   
      Several lines of steamers are established, con-
      1 For much of this information regarding the railroads of Cuba,
    we are indebted to a lucid manuscript report drawn.up several
    years since, by C. D. Tolrae, Esq., formerly British consul, and still
    a resident at Havana, whose varied and accurate information rela-
    tive to Cuba is probably unsurpassed by that of any foreigner there.
    We have also to acknowledge our obligations to the modest but
    valuable work of Don Jos6 G. de Arbolfcya, entitled “ Manual de la
    Ysla de Cuba.”
326
humkoldt’s cuba.
     necting all the principal ports with Havana, and an
     active trade is carried on by them. The lines on the
     south coast connect with the Havana railroad, 'at
     Batabano. In summer from six to eight, and in
     winter from ten to twelve steamers, are kept con-
     stantly running.
       Neither the “Balanzas#de Comercio” nor the
     “ Cuadro Estadisticb ” give us any information in
     relation to the coastwise trade by sea, although it is
     very large, the entries at the Havana custom-house
     in 1851, of vessels employed in this trade having
     amounted to 3,493. The returns of the marine
     department show that 433 vessels of twenty tons
     burden and upwards, and 1,289 under twenty tons,
     are matriculated, three-fourths of which are sup-
     posed to bo engaged in the domestic coasting trade.
     This is by no means improbable, as the number of
     vessels employed in this trade is very great, the
     general movement of freight upon the railroads
     being to the nearest seaport, whence it is conveyed
     by sea to Havana. The larger class are generally
     schooners, constructed on the finest models,' and
     many of them are built in Cuba from the admirable
     timber furnished by her forests—mahogany being
     often used in the frame, and cedar in planking
     them. Within a short time steam propellers have
               INTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS.         327
  been advantageously introduced in tbis trade, for
  which they seem eminently adapted. The electric
  telegraph has lately been introduced, but being en-
  tirely in the hands of the government it is of little
  service to the public.
                                                                                                                    (
                          iiumboldt’s Cuba.
                        CHAPTER X1L
                            REVENUE.
       Historical sketch—Its comparatively large amount—Causes of great
         expenditure—Struggle with the Spanish republics—Mistaken
         policy of Spain—Customs revenue of Havana, 1789 to 1822-
         Detail of revenue, 1824—Increase—Internal taxes, 1735 to 1818
         —Revenue and expenditure, 1822—Comments of the Intendcnt—
         Subsidies from Mexico to Cuba—[Note.—Sources of present
         revenue examined—Maritime revenue and tariff—Internal taxes—
         Direct revenue—State property—Declared revenue—Items of
         government income to be added—Total revenue—Abuses in Cuba
         Evil effects of the revenue system—Appropriations—Civil list^-
         Army—Navy—Crown income—Average product to Spain—Per-
         centage on official incomes—Revenue from 1826 to 1852—Com-
         pared with revenue of Spanish government in Mexico—
         Reflections.]
         TriE increase of agricultural prosperity in the
       island of Cuba, and the accumulation of wealth
       flowing from the value of its importations, has. aug-
       mented the public revenue during late years to four
       and a half, and perhaps even five millions of dol-
       lars. The custom-house of Havana, which before
       the year 1794 yielded less than $600,000, and from
                        REVENUE.                32!)
  1797 to 1800 an average of $1,900,000, brings to
  tli© public treasury, since the declaration of the
  freedom of commerce, a net sum of more than
  $3,100,000. As the colonial government gives the
  greatest publicity to everything concerning the col-
  lection of revenue in Cuba, we learn by the reports
  of the treasury department for the city and district
  of Havana, that from 1820 to 1825, the public
  revenue in the subordinate departments of this
  treasury, has oscillated between $3,200,000 and
  $3,400,000. If to this sum we add $800,000, which '
  the treasury has received from other branches of
  revenue, as lottery, tithes, &c., and also the income
  from the custom-houses of Trinidad, Matanzas, Bara-
  coa, and St. Jagode Cuba, which amounted to more
  than $600,000 previous to the year 1819, we are
  convinced that the estimated revenue of five millions
  of dollars for the whole island is not exaggerated.
  A few simple comparisons will prove how large is
  this product relatively to the actual state of the
  colony.
    The island of Cuba has not over one forty-second
  part of the population of France, and as about one-
  half of its inhabitants live in a state of extreme
  poverty, they consume but little. Its revenues
  equal those of Colombia, and exceed the product of
  all the custom-houses of the United States prior to
 330
dumboldt’s cuba.
      the year 1795, when that Confederation had 4,500,000
      inhabitantsyet Cuba contains only 715,000. The
      customs tariff is the principal source of revenue in
      this beautiful colony; it produces more than three-
      fifths of the total income, and suffices to cover with
      ease, all the necessities of internal administration,
      and military defence.
         Though the disbursements of the treasury of
      Havana have, during the last few years, exceeded
      $4,000,000, this excessive expenditure has been
      caused by the tenacious struggle which the metro-
      polis has endeavored to sustain with the emancipated
      colonies. Two millions of dollars have been dis-
      bursed in the pay of troops and sailors, that have
      retreated from the American continent to Spain by
      way of Havana. All the while that Spain, ignoring
      her true interests, shall delay the recognition of the
      independence of the new republics, the island of
      Cuba, menaced by Colombia and the Mexican Con-,
      federation, must maihtain a military equipment in
      solf-defence, that will absorb the colonial revenues.
      The navy alone stationed at Havana costs more than
      $600,000, and the land forces require annually nearly 1
         1 The custom-houses of the United States, which, from 1801 to
       1808 yielded sixteen millions annually, in 1816 gave only $7,282,000.
       —Morse*.i Modem Geography, p. 638.—H.
                                                            REVENUE.
331
    a million and a half of dollars. Such a state of
    things cannot long endure, if Spain does not alle-
    viate the burdens that weigh upon the colony.
      From 1789 to 1797 the product of the custom-
    house at Havana never attained, one year with
    another, more than $700,000. The revenues con-
    tributed to the royal treasury were,
1789 .. ...$479,302 1793 .. .. $635,098 
1790... ... 642,720 1794... ... 642,320 
1791... ... 520,202 1795... ... 643,583 
1792... ... 849,904 1796...             
      From 1797 to 1800 the crown and municipal
   duties collected at Havana amounted to $7,034,126,
   being an average of $1,908,000:
1797 .. ...$1,257,017 1801 .. ...$2,170,970 
1798... ... 1,822,348 1802,,, ... 2,400,932 
1799,,. ... 2,305,080 1803... ... 1,637,4G5 
1800...                                     
       The custom-house at Havana yielded in:
            1808 ...$1,178,074   •. 1811.....$1,409,137
            1809 ..  1,913,005      1814..... 1,855,117
            1810...... 1,292,619
       The decrease of revenue in 1808 was attributed to
    the American embargo, but in 1809 the court per-
    mitted the free entrance of foreign neutral vessels.
        332                 humboldt’s cuba.
        From 1815 to 1819 the crown duties collected at
        Havana amounted to $11,575,460; the municipal
        duties to $6,709,347, being a total of $18,284,807,
        and a yearly average of $3,657:,000, of which the
        municipal duties composed fifty-six per cent. Dur-
        ing the three succeeding years the income of the
        general treasury at Havana amounted to:
                1820 ....$3,631,279                      1822  $3,378,228
                1821 .... 3,277,639
          In 1823, the crown and municipal duties on
        imports have yielded $2,734,563. The returns of
        the “ Administracion General” of Havana for 1824,
        have been as follows:
                I.—Import duties,..................$1,818,89G
              II.  —Export duties,................... 320,810
              III. —Coastwise duties, and other branches
                     (salt, deposit, <fcc.),.v .....  188,415
              17.—Internal imposts—
                     Tax on slaves,..........$ 73,109
                     Tax on sales of land,___ 215,092
                     Sub-administrations,.... 154,840
                     Shops, ................... 19,714
                     Other branches,........... 10,931
                                              ------  473,080
              V.—Auxiliary branches,................. 130,923
              VL—Consulado, wharfage, &c.,............ 80,504
                     Total in 1824,..............  $3,025,300
                                                           KEVENCE.
333
      In the year 1825, the revenue of the city and dis-
    trict of Havana has amounted to $3,350,300.
      These partial data demonstrate that from 1789 to
    1824, the public revenue has increased seven fold.
    This fact is made more evident if we examine the. •
    returns of the ten subordinate treasuries of the inte-
    rior—Matanzas, Villa Clara, Iiemedios, Trinidad,
    Santi Espiritu, Puerto Principe, Iiolguin, Bayamo,
% St. Jago de Cuba,, and Baracoa. Senor Barrutia has
    published an interesting statement of these returns,
    embracing a period of eighty-three years, from 1735
    to 1818. The revenue of these treasuries has pro-
    gressively increased from $900 to $600,000.
1735,... ........$896          1738,....  .......$1,794 
1730____ ........ 800          1739.....  ....... 4,747 
1737.... ........ 902                                   
n, for the five years,.......             ....... 1,840 
1775....                       1778.....  .....$158,024 
1770....                       1779.....  .....'140,007 
1777....                       Mean,____  ..... m.:5i > 
1814....                       1817.....  .....$524,442 
1815....                       1818.....  ..... 618,036 
1810..,.                       Mean, .... ..... 474,072 
      The total amount for the eighty-three years is
    $13,098,000, of which St.' Jago de Cuba contributed
    $4,390,000, Puerto Principe $2,224,000, and Matau-
    zas $1 450,788.
       334              HUMBOLDT5S CUBA.
         By the returns of the general treasury, the public
       revenue of the district of Havana alone, in 1822,
       amounted to $4,311,862; of which $3,127,918 was
       from customs, $601,898 from items of direct income,
       as lottery, tithes, &c., and $581,978 drafts upon the
       fund of the Gonsulado and deposits.
         Hie expenditures during the same year were, for
       Cuba, $2,732,738, and for appropriations to maintain
       the struggle with the continental colonies, $1,362,062-
       In the first class we find $1,355,798 for the land
       forces charged with the defence of Havana, and
       contiguous towns, and $648,908 for the navy sta-
       tioned at Havana. In the second class of expendi-
       tures, foreign to the local administration, we find
       $1,115,672 paid to 4,234 officers and soldiers, who,
         *
       after having evacuated Mexico, Colombia, and other
       points of the the continent formerly under Spanish
       dominion, have passed through Havana on their
       return to Spain; and $164,000 expended in the
       defence of the castle of San Juan do Ulua.
         Don Claudio Martinez de Pinillos, intendant of
       the island of Cuba, in his notes accompanying the
       report of the general treasury for 1822, makes the
       following observations: “ If to the extraordinary
       expenditure of $1,362,022 for matters relating to the
       general interests of the Spanish monarchy, we add,
       on one hand, the greater part of the $648,908 appro-
                                                                   KICVENUE.
335
   priated to the royal navy, the service of which is not
   limited to the defence of Havana, and, on the other
   hand, the expenses arising from the visits of the
   mail ships, and other vessels of war, we shall Hud
   that $2,010,930 (which is n,early one-half the public
   revenue) has been expended for purposes which
   have no direct connection with the internal adminis-
   tration of the island.” How much will be gained
   by the welfare and enlightenment of that country,
   if the day should arrive, when, enjoying internal
   tranquillity, more than a million and a half of dollars
   may be yearly employed in works of public utility.
     In documents which I obtained from the archives
   of the vice-rbyalty of Mexico, I have found that the
   pecuniary assistance sent from the treasury of that
   country annually to Havana, amounted, at the
   beginning of the present century, to the following
   sums:
        For the squadron, navy-yards, aud wants of
        the royal navy, by cedula of l(i Jan., 1790, $700,000
        For the maritime establishments on the
            Mosquito coast,............................   40,000
          For the army of Havana,....................... 290,000
          For the same at St. Jago de Cuba,............. 146,000
          ■For fortifications,......'................... 150,000
          For the pnrcbase of tobacco aud segars for
            the royal factory at Sevilla,................. 500,000
                                                     $1,826,000
        336            1 humboldt’s Cuba.
          To this sum, which is now borne by the treasury
        at Havana, we may add $577,000 which Mexico
        paid to the treasury of Louisiana, $151,000 to that
        of Florida, and $377,000 to the island of Puerto
        Eico.
          [Mote.—Before proceeding to examine the present
        state of the revenue in Cuba, a succinct view of the
        sources from which it is derived, may not be inap-
        propriate here. For greater clearness, we shall cliiss
        them under four heads:—I. Maritime revenue, being
        that collected by customs, imposts upon exports,
        imports, and shipping; II. Internal taxes, compris-
        ing fixed and stated imposts; III. Direct revenue,
        being that collected not by imposts, under variable
        conditions; IV. State property, being income from
        property belonging to the crown.
          I. Maritime Revenue.—The tariff on imports is
        arranged with a fixed per centage upon a stated
        valuation of nearly all the articles of commerce.
        Inspectors examine and class the importations, for
        the collection of the proper duties, and whore the
        tariff does not state the valuation, they appraise the
        article. The principle adopted for valuation by the
        tariff, seems to be that of attaining as. nearly as
        possible the market value of the articles in Havana,
                                                           REVENUE.
337
 exclusive only of the duties thereon; and as a
general rule, the per centage is arranged upon the
following scale, although there are some few
exceptions. Cotton and woolen goods and articles
of food, 35] per cent.; linen and silk goods, and
articles of use, 29] per cent. These are the rates for
foreign products imported in foreign bottoms.
When of Spanish product or manufacture, imported
from Spain, the same goods pay only 9] per cent,
duty, and there is also a differential duty on goods
of foreign product or manufacture, of 10 per cent.'
on the first, and 8 per cent, on the second class, in
favor of importations in Spanish bottoms. A few
articles pay fixed duties, such as flour, which from
Spain pays $2, and from foreign ports $10 75 a
barrel.
   The tariff upon exports is in most instances a fixed
arbitrary impost, having no relation to the value of
the goods; for instance, sugar pays 87] cents a box,
coffee 20 cents a quintal, segars 75 cents a thousand,
&c. The tonnage duties are levied at the rate of
62] cents a ton for Spanish, and $1 50 per ton for
foreign vessels, according to Spanish measurement.
There are several other small tonnage imposts, as
health, dredging, &c., and fees and dues for visits,
clearance,- lights, &c. Under the warehouse or
bonded system, goods entered and cleared in bond
                         15
338
                              htjmboldt’s cuba.
      pay li Per cent. entl7> the same for clearance, and
      lj- per cent, storage yearly, after tlxe first year.
      Materials for railroads, machinery for sugar estates,
      books and instruments for scientific institutions, and
      a small number of other articles are free of duty.
         II. Internal Taxes.—The principal items of this
      class of revenue are the following:—
            Alcabala, a tax of six per cent, on the value of
      real estate and slaves sold or transferred. Thoro is
      also an additional tax of six per cent, on the amount
      of the alcabala, which is imposed under certain
      circumstances. The annual yield of this impost
      varies between $600,000 and $700,000.
         Meats       consumed—A tax of $3 50 per head on all
      beef cattle, 37| cents for each sheep or goat, and
      .311 cents for each arrobo of swine killed for
      consumption, and 12-J cents per arrobe on all meat
      killed for drying or curing purposes. The annual
      yield of this tax varidfe from $500,000 to $600,000'.
         Tithes.—Ten per cent, on the product of the
      haciendas, potrcros, and all small cattle breeding" or
      labor farms. Two-and-a-half per cent, on the •
      product of sugar, coffee, and tobacco plantations.
      The annual yield of this tax to the government varies
      from $400,000 to $500,000.
         Stamps.-—An impost raised by the obligatory use
                                                            REVENUE.
339
r
         of stamped paper in all official intercourse (except
1     diplomatic), tribunals, public instruments, bills of
 |           exchange, promissory notes, &c. The paper for
         common uses, is divided into six classes, the price
for each sheet being for the first, $8; second, $6;
third, $1 50; fourth, 50 cents; fifth (for official
intercourse), and sixth (for the declared pauper), 5
cents each. This tax produces from $250,000 to
$300,000. Tire stamps for bills of exchange and
notes, are graduated at 18| cents for $250 and
;under; 37| cents for $625 and under; 75 cents for
$1,250 and under, and 75 cents for each additional
$1,250. The annual product from this tax is between
$35,000 and $15,000, in addition to the above stated
'       product from other stamps.
           Judicial Fees.—The judges of the Heal udien-
           cia, and the Alcaldes  M having a fixed salary,
         the fees accruing to them are paid into the royal
         treasury, and yield to it from $50,000 to $55,000
         yearly.
           Td'Ji on Costs.—A tax of four per cent, on all
         assessed costs of judicial proceedings, yields annu-
         ally from $50,000 to $70,000.
 : Shops and Stores,—A fixed impost of $30 each, in
Havana, and $25 in other parts of the island, yield-
ing from $125,000 to $150,000 annually,
j         Mortgages.—A tax of ouc-half of one per cent, on
340
humboldt’s ouba.
*
         the value of all property sold is collected through
         the registrar of mortgages; yielding from $40,000 to
         $50,000, per annum.
            There are several minor imposts, as tax on cock-
         pits, yielding from $20,000 to $30,000—on house
         servants, water tax at Havana, novenos , auction
         tax, &c.
            III.   Direct Revenue.—Includes items of direct
         income to the treasury, which are not taxes, among
         which the principal are:
            Lottery.—Carried on by the government, which
         reserves twenty-live per cent, of the gross amount of
         each scheme. It is drawn every three weeks, and
         yields annually from $050,000 to $670,000.
            Post-Office.—Yields a net annual revenue of about
         $100,000.
            Fees of the Captain-General.—These fees are by
         law to be paid into the treasury; but in the returns
         for the year 1853 (the latest we possess), the amount
         is not stated. Well-informed persons suppose it to
         amount to $100,000, and some place it as high as
         two or three times, this sum.
              Fines. Confiscations, dec.—Are payable directly
         into the treasury, hut they cannot be estimated. IV.
            IV. State Property.—Tho. properly of the State
                                                            revenue.
341
    in Cnba yields an income naturally variable. It
    arises principally from the following sources:
       Church Property.—The administration of tlie ex-
    propriated church property, and occasional partial
    sales, produces a regular income. In 1850, it
    amounted to about $200,000.
       Mentals.—Rents of State lands and property
    yields from $4^,000 to $50,000 annually.
       Land Sales.—The sales of public lands in 1850,
    produced $37,000.
       Chwch           Revenues, expropriated by the State, yield
    in the same year $87,000.
       There are some minor branches of income which
    brings up the annual yield of this class to about
    $400,000.
       The declared revenue of the Spanish government
    in Cuba, in 1852, the latest of which we have been
    able to obtain complete returns, was as follows:
           I. Maritime revenue,
           II. Internal taxes, ...
          III. Direct revenue,..
          IV,  State property, ,.
       But in order to arrive at a knowledge of the
    approximate amount of government exactions in
..$8,870,000
.. 2,750,000
,..  980,000
...   400,000
- $13,000,000
                           TIUMBOLDT’s CUBA.
 342
          Cuba, wc should add to the foregoing the following
          items, which are properly state burdens, and consti-
          tute revenue.
               Tax mi slaves imported—for which $51 each is
               collected by officials—-yearly average, 10,000,. $510,000
               Municipal revenues of the several ayuntamicn-
               tos, and municipalities in the island, .. * ,... 000,000
               Income of the non-salaried administrative officers
                 of the government—two Governors (of Matan-
                 zas and St. Jago), $25,000 each, ... .$ 50,000
                 29 Lieut. Governors, at $5,000,...... 145,000
                 299 Captains de Partido at $1,000,.„. 299,000
                 Subordinate officers,................ 326,000
                                                     •--------- 820,000
                Income of non-salaried judiciary officers:
                   42 Alcaldes ordinarios, at $5,000,______$210,000
                  100 Assessors (crown law officers), at
                     $5,000,.'............:..............  500,000
                  450 Subordinate- officers of courts, at
                     $800,..............................   360,000  -
                                                          --------- 1,070,000
                Income of non-salaried officials,..........................$ 3,000,000
                Revenue before stated,........................... 13,000,000
                       Total revenue,............................$1G,000,000
           This estimate does not pretend to include all the
         exactions to which the people of Cuba are subjected
         by the officials of the present government, but only
         the pay of those administrative and judiciary offi-
                             REVENUE.                   343
       cers, who, under proper systems of government, are
       paid fixed salaries by the State, in order to pre-
       vent as far as possible, an abuse of the power they
       must necessarily wield in the community. To show
       the character and extent of this abuse, we copy the
       following extract from Gen. Concha’s work on Cuba,
       published in Madrid, in 1853:
         “ The absence of fixed salaries makes official situ-
       ations uncertain in the extreme, under which the
       probabilities of their proving lucrative can only be
       estimated by antecedents. What, then, must any
       one think, calculate, or hope- for, who, soliciting or
       accepting an appointment, sees that after a few .
       years an incumbent returns to Spain with a fortune,
       not such as he might have made by means of the
       strictest economy, while holding one of the best paid
       places at home, but one comparable only to those
       made by fortunate speculators. * * * * For
       many reasons, it is unfortunately too notorious that
       an officer of a special tribunal was able to save
       or make from his office, in the short space of
       four months, more than Fokty Thousand Dol-
       lars 1” 1
         The appropriation of the revenue of Cuba, as
        1 “Memoria sobro el Estado politico do Cuba, por Gen. Josa do la
      Concha,” p. 331.
344
                         humboldt’s cttba.
         nearly as it can bo made up from the returns of the
         Havana treasury, is as follows:
                                CIVIL LIST.
               Pay and expenses of executive officers, $ 250,000
               Perquisites of same,.. 1............... 1,330,000
               Pay and expenses of judiciary, ......     110,000
               Perquisites of same,,.................. 1,070,000
000,000
350,000
               Municipal expenditures,..............
               Junta de Fomento, public works, ,.
               Church service,......................... 200,0001
               Government police,.............$75,000
               Civil          do............... 90,000
                                              ------1(15,000
               Civil pensions, ...............$130,000
               Church, do..................... 120,000
               Ileirs of Columbus, do.,....    16,000
                                             ------- 166,000
               Public charities,. ...................... 33,000
               Public schools,.......................... 12,000
               Prisons, ..............................   65,000
               Pay and expenses of treasury,........    740,000
               Balances to other treasuries, .......!.  510,000
               Difference between the gross amount
                 of revenue, as returned in the “ Ba-
                 lanzas de Comercio,” and net reve-
                 nue declared,......................... 2,079,000
$7,C80,000
m*"- ■
!K ■
                                       EE VENUE.                    345 
.. 1 > ’•                                                               
       • -                            ARMY LIST.                        
           Pay roll of                                                  
.*> ’      19 Reg., 4 comp. Infantry,.......                .$1,700,000 
           2 Regiments, Cavalry,..........                    . 210,000 
>■..       1 Reg., 5 comp. Artillery,........                ,. 380,000 
           General officers,................                     63,000 
           Engineer corps,.................                      86,000 
V '                                              -----$2,429,000        
v ;f       Clotliiug, equipment, and arms,.....                         
           Cattle and equipment,.............                           
           Material for artillery corps,........                        
           Ditto “ 'engineer do., ........                              
■ • ?      Transportation,.................                             
;          Other expenditures for the army, . .,                        
           Hospitals,.......................     ........... 300,000    
. *        Military pensions,................    ........... 165,000    
4          Pay roll of Militia Infantry........             ....$12,000 
           do. do. Cavalry,.......               ..... 53,000           
; ” - :                                                          65,000 
V                                                            $3,799,000 
                                   NAVY LIST.                           
\ *'       Pay roll, and expenses of ships, dockyards, &c., SI,760,000  
s • *, * ^                        REVENUE TO THE CROWN.                 
           Drafts of the general treasury at Madrid, ...... S2,450,000  
           Annual remittance to Maria Christina,......... 166,000       
* ■'       Interest on drafts from Spain,.......                        
i          Spanish ministers and consuls in America,...... 117,000      
           Annual remittance of segars for the court,..... 16,000       
* '-f \                                      15*             $2,771,000 
 /
 /
346
                            uummoldt’s cuba.
                                   RECAPITULATION.
           Civil List,...................$7,680,000
           Army List,...................  3,799,000
           Navy List....................  1,750,000
           Revenue to the Crown.......... 2,771,000
                                         $16,000,000
    The net income to the crown of Spain from the
island of Cuba, it will be seen, is about two and
three quarters millions. The published returns show
that from 1836 to 1850 it averaged about two mil-
lions eight hundred thousand dollars. While this
revenue flows into the coffers of the State, the
administration proper has another source of revenue
in Cuba, in the percentage upon the product of their
offices which many officers in that island pay to the
officers in power in the mother country, that they
may retain their places.
    Baron Humboldt has given, in the preceding pages,
a succinct view of the declared revenue of Cuba to
1825, to which we can add the following, compiled
from the works of Don Ramon de la Sagra, tho
“ Ouadro Estadistico,” and several “ Balanzas,” in
our possession:
 $42,808,182
43,373,087
50,650,982
1826 to 1830
1831 “ 1835
1836 “ 1840
                            Carry forward.... $136,832,251
                               REVENUE.
347
                         Brought forward.. ‘. $136,832,251
        1841   “   1845 ........................ 54,465,970
        1846   “   1850 (approximate) .......... 57,500,000
  ,              18511........................ 12,462,834
                1852 ..........................  12,873,086
                                 Total........$274,134,141
    A comparison of the foregoing views of the reve-
nue of the Spanish government in Cuba, with its
revenue in the vice-royalty of Mexico in 1809, the
year in which the revolution began, may not be unin-
teresting. General Zavala, in his “ Ensayo Historico
• do la Rcvolucion de Mexico,” states the revenues of
the vice-royalty in detail, which reduced to a tabu-
lar form, exhibit the following figures:
                                         REVENUE.
                Mexico.                       Cuba.
    I.  Mining revenue, $3,837,954   I. Maritime revenue, $8,870,000
    II. Internal taxes,  5,793,0G4  II.  Internal taxes,   2,750,000
  III. Direct revenue,   1,487,11G III, Direct revenue,      980,000
  IV.  Tobacco monopoly,3,927,822   IV. State property,      400,000
                      $15,045,956                        $13,000,000
    1 In estimating tlio revenue for 1851 and 1852, we have added to
the maritime revenue, as given by the “ Balanzas ” for those years,
an estimated revenue of four millions from other sources.
348
humboldt’s cuba.
  EXPENDITURE 8 *
                 Mexico,
  I. Civil list,        not stated
  II. Anny and Navy, $3,800,000
III Judiciary & Church, 250,000
 IV.  Pensions,            200,000
  V.  Hospitals,           400,800
 VI.  Treasury expenses, 500,260
VII. Interest,           1,496,000
                                                                                           $6,743,000
                                                 Cuba.
   I. Civil list,-----------------
   II. Army and Navy, $5,549,000
  III. Judiciary & Church, 310,000
  IV. Pensions,            321,000
  V. Hospitals,            300,000
  VI. Treasury expenses, 740,000
VH. Interest,               22,000
                                                                                          $7,242,000
   These data show that the financial condition of the
government of Cuba at the present time, and that of
the Spanish government in Mexico at the time of its
greatest prosperity, are very similar; but we should
remember that the population of the two countries at
the relative periods of time is widely dissimilar, that
of Cuba being a million and a half, and that of
Mexico seven millions.
   The system under which this enormous sum of six-
teen millions of dollar^ is extracted from less than a
million and a half of people, exercises, apart from its
large amount, a very pernicious influence upon the
public welfare. The imposts upon food, and articles
of common use, by the tariff on imports, and the tax
on meats killed in tho country, throw more than
sixty per cent, of the declared revenue directly upon
                                                              REVENUE.
349
the labor of the country, while the system of uon-
paid officials and officers of justice, tends to throw
the burden of their support upon the poor, it being
notorious that the wealthy can obtain favor by perso-.
nal influence. Thus, nearly the whole burden of the
State is thrown upon the common people, which
tends to accumulate wealth in the hands of the few,
making the rich richer, and the poor poorer, to the
manifest disadvantage of the common weal. •
With such a buoyant prosperity, what might we
not hope from Cuba, if the millions which are now
drawn from the fountains of her wealth to support a
foreign and corrupt government, and a large non-
producing armed force, were allowed to flow in their
natural channels, to the reward of labor, the increase
of individual wealth, and the advance of the public
welfare.]
     1 i
350
                 ITUMBOLDT 8 CUBA,
 ■ f
          CHAPTER XIIL
                 A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
                            Change of plans—Preparations for departure—Remission of speci-
                            mens to Europe—Long absence without letters—Joyful news—
  Difficulties to be surmounted—Objections met—Charter of a           \
  schooner—Financial arrangements—Departure—Grateful acknow-          1
  ledgments—The Orleans priaces—Road across the island—Cot-           I
  ton plant—Batabano—Supposed encroachments of the sea—
  Gloom of the marshes—Cocodrilos and Caymans—Their habits
  and characteristics—Specimens—Comparison with those of South ■
  America—Suggestions—Dampier’s description of them—Erabar-
  cation—Discomfort on board—Gulf of Batabano—Isle of Pines
  —Jardines and Jardinillos—Struggle of Columbus here—Bcauti-
                                                                                       i
                              ful phenomenon—Temperatures of the sea—Clearness of the water
                              —Cause thereof—Incompeteney of pilot—Anchor at night—
                             ( Multitude of shooting-stars-j-Absence of life in these regions—
  Contrast with the time of Columbus—Arts of the Indian fisher-
  men—Similar arts among other uncivilized nations—Visit to the
  Cays—Their geognostic constitution—Does the sea grow shallow
  here—Cay Bonito—Pelicans—Barbarity of the sailors—Vegeta-
  tion—Charm of these regions—Memories of Columbus and Cortes
  Columbus and the natives—Fleets of pirogues from Yucatan—            U
  Hopes of Columbus—His remarkable vision—His pathetic com-
  plaints— Ilernan Cortes—Stranding of his ship—Gathering of his
  fleet—Fall of Mexico—Strange vicissitudes—Cay Flamenco—
                   A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.                  351
      *
   Fresh water on the Cays—Springs in the sea—Similar springs at
   CardenaB—The Manatee—Dampier’s description of it—Cay de
   Piedras—The open sca—Its temperature—Marshy coast—Las
   Casas grant of Indians—Bay of Jagua—Cienfuegos—Hills of San
   Juan—A bold coast—Mexican wax found in Cuba—River San
   Juan—Remains of native1 inhabitants—Sea temperature—Arrival
   at the river Guaurabo—Ludicrous conveyance to the city—
   Trinidad—Absence of snow—First settlement—Fine view—Astro-
   nomical observations—Hospitality—Dinner given by the governor
   —Complaints of the inhabitants—Ports of Trinidad, Guaurabo—
   Casilda—An agreeable evening—Cubau ladies—Departure from
   Trinidad—Stately conveyance—Fire-dies—Interesting anecdote
   —Conclusion.
   Towajmd the close of April,’ 1801, Monsieur
Bonpland and myself, having completed the series of
observations we had proposed making on the extreme
northern limit of the torrid zone, were about to
depart for Vera Cruz with the squadron of Admiral
Aristizabal; but the false intelligence contained in
the public gazettes, relative to the expedition of
Captain Baudin, induced us to abandon the project
we had entertained, of crossing Mexico on our way
to the Philippine Islands. Many papers, and parti-
cularly those of the United States, announced that
   1 Thus, in the original, but it is undoubtedly a slip of the pen,
aud should read February instead of “ April.” Baron Humboldt
arrived at Havana, on his drat visit to Cuba, on the 19th December,
1800, and sailed from Trinidad on the 16th March, 1801.
   352               iitjmboldt’b cuba.
   two Frencli corvettes, the Geogra/phe and the Natvr
   raliste, had sailed for Cape Horn, and would run
   along the coasts of Chili and Peru, from whence
   they were to proceed to New Holland.
      This news excited ine greatly, for it again filled'
   my imagination vjth the projects I had formed dur-
   ing my stay in Paris, when I had not ceased for a
   moment to urge the ministry of the Directory to
   hasten the departure of Captain Baudin. While on
   the point of leaving Spain, I had promised to join
   the expedition wherever I might be able to reach it.
   , When one desires a thing that may produce unto-
   ward results, he easily persuades himself that a sense
   of obligation is the only motive that influences his
   determination.- Monsieur Bonplaud, always enter-
   prising and confident in our good fortune, determined
   at once to divide our collection of plants into three
   parts.
      In order not to expose all that we had collected,
   with so much labor, oh the banks of the Orinoco,
   Atabapo, and Kio Negro, to tho chances of a long
   sea voyage, we sent one part to Germany by way
   of England, another to France by way of Cadiz;
   and left the third at Havana. We afterwards had
   reason to congratulate ourselves on the adoption of
   this course, which prudence counselled. Each part
   contained, with slight difference, the same species
                     A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.                353
    and classes, and no precaution was omitted to secure
    the remission of the cases to Sir Joseph Banks, or to
    the directors of the Museum of Natural History at
    Paris, in case they should fall into the hands of
    English or French cruisers.
      Fortunately, the manuscripts which I had at first
  intended to send with the portion sent to Cadiz,
  were not placed in charge of our friend and fellow-
  traveller, friar Juan Gonzalez. This estimable
  young.man, of whom I have often had occasion
  to speak, had accompanied us to Havana, on liis
  way to Spain, and sailed from* Cuba shortly after
  our departure; but the vessel in which he embarked
  was lost with all her passengers and freight, in a
  . tempest on the coast of Africa.* By this shipwreck
  we lost one of the duplicates of our collection of
  plants; and also, which' was a greater misfortune for
  . the cause of science, all the insects that Bonpland
  had gathered, under a thousand difficulties, during
  our voyage to the Orinoco and Rio Negro.
      By an extraordinary fatality we remained two
    years in the Spanish colonies without receiving a
    . single letter from Europe, and those which reached
    us in the three subsequent years, gave no informa-
    tion in regard to the collections we had sent. One
    will readily conceive how anxious I was to learn the
    fate of a diary which contained all our astronomical
354
                              UUMROLTVr’s CITRA.
       observations, and barometrical readings of altitudes,
       and which I had so patiently copied out in full. It
       was only after having traversed New Granada,
       Mexico, and Peru, and when I was on the point of
       leaving the New World, that in the public library
       at Philadelphia, I accidentally ran my eye over the
       table of contents of a scientific review, and there
       saw these words, “Arrival of the Manuscripts of
       M. Humboldt, at the residence of his brother, in
       Paris, by way of Spain.” With difficulty I sup-
       pressed the expression of my joy, and it seemed to
       me that no table of contents had ever before been so
       well arranged.
         While M. Bonpland labored night and day,
       dividing and arranging our collections, I had the
       ungracious task of meeting a thousand obstacles that
       presented themselves to oui* sudden and unforeseen
       departure. There was no vessel in the harbor of
       Havana that would convey us to Porto Bello or
       Carihagena, and the persons whom I consulted took
       a pleasure in exaggerating the inconveniences that
       attended the crossing of .the isthmus, and the delays
       incident to a voyage southward, from Panama to
       Guayaquil, and thence to Lima or Valparaiso.
         They censured me, and perhaps with reason, for
       not continuing to explore the vast and rich countries
       of Spanish America, which had bqen closed for
                    A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.               355
   half a century to foreign travellers. The vicissitudes
   of a voyage round the world, touching only at a few
   islands, or the arid coasts of a continent, did not
   seem to them preferable to studying the geological
   constitution of New Spain, which alone contributed
   five-eighths of the mass of silver taken yearly from
   all the mines of the known world. To these argu-
   ments, I opposed the wish to determine on a large
   scale, the inflexion of the curves of equal inclination
   of the decrease of the magnetic force from the pole
   toward tlie equator, and the temperature of the
   ocean as it varies with the latitude, the direction of
   the currents, and the proximity of banks and shoals.
     In proportion as obstacles rose to my plans, I
   hastened the more to put them in execution, and not
   being able to find a passago in a neutral vessel, I
   chartered a Catalan schooner lying in the roadstead
   of .Batabano, to take me to Porto Bello or Cartha-
   gena., as the winds might permit. The oxtonded
   relations of the prosperous commerce of Havana
   afforded me the means for making my pecuniary
   arrangements for several years. General Gonzalo
   de OT’arril, distinguished alike for his talents and
   his high character, then resided in my own country,
   as minister from the court of Spain. I was enabled
   to exchange my income in Prussia for a part of his
   in the island of Cuba, and the family of Don
35(5
HUMBOLDTS CUBA.
           Ygnacio O’Farril y Herrera, liis brother, kindly
           did all they could to forward my projects at the time
           of my unexpected departure from Havana.
             On the sixth of March, we learned that the
           schooner I had chartered was ready for sea. The
           road to Batabano led us again through Giiines, to
           the sugar plantation of Bio Blanco, the residence of
           Count de Jaruco y Mopox, which was adorned witli
           all the luxuries that good taste and a large fortune
           can command. That hospitality which generally
           wanes as civilization advances, is still practised in
           Cuba with the same profusion as in the most distant
           countries of Spanish America. We naturalists and
           simple travellers accord with pleasure to the inhabi-
           tants of Havana, the same grateful acknowledg-
           ments that have been given to them by those
           illustrious strangers,1 who, everywhere that I have
           followed their route, have left in the Hew World
           the remembrance of their noble simplicity, their
           ardor for learning and their love for the public
           weal.
             From Bio Blanco to Batabano, the road passes
           through an uncultivated country, a portion of which
            1 The young princes of the House of Orleans (the Duke d’Orlcans,
          the Duke de Montpensicr, and the Count de Beaujolois), who visited
          the United States and Havana, descending the Ohio and Mississippi
          rivers, and remained a year in the island of Cuba,—H.
                                                        A TKIP TO TRINIDAD.
357
   contains many springs. In the open spaces the
  indigo and cotton plants grow wild for want of cultb
  vation. As the capsule of the                opens at
   that season of the year when the northern storms are
  most frequent, the fibre which surrounds the seed is
  torn from side to side, and the cotton, which in other
  ' respects is of the best quality, suffers greatly when
  the period of the storms coincides with its ripening.
  Further south we found a new species of the palm,
  with fan-like leaves {corifa maritima), having a free
  filament in the interstices between the leaves. This
  corifa abounds through a portion of the southern
  coast, and takes the place of the majestic royal palm,
  and the coco orispa of the northern shore. Porous
  limestone (of the Jurassic formation) appeared from
  lime to time in the plain.
     Batabano was at this time a poor hamlet, where a
  church had been built a few years before. Half a
  league beyond it the swamp begins, which extends
  to the entrance of the Bay of Jagua, a distance of
  seventy leagues from west to east. It is supposed at
  Batabano that the sea continues its encroachments
  upon the land, and that the oceanic irruption has
  been observed particularly at the time of the great
  upheaving at the closo of the eighteenth century,
  when tlio tobacco mills near Havana were destroyed,
  and the course of the river Chorrera was changed.
358
HUMBOLDT S CUBA.
      Nothing can. be more gloomy .than the view of the
      marshes around Batabano, for not a tree breaks the
      monotony of the scene, and the decaying trunks of
      a few palms only rise, like broken masts, in the
      midst of great thickets of running vines and purple
      flag flowers.
        As we remained only one night at Batabano, I
      regretted that I could not obtain exact information
      relative to^the two species of cocodrilos that infest
      the swamp. The inhabitants call ope the cayman,
      and the other the cocodrib, which name is generally
      applied to both. We were assured that the latter is
      the most agile, and the tallest when on its feet; ■ that
      its snout runs to a much sharper point than that of
      the cayman, with which it never associates. It is
      very fearless, and is even said to leap on board of
      vessels when it can find a support for its tail. The
      great daring of this animal was noticed during the
      early expeditions of Diego Velasquez. At the river
      Cauto, and along the marshy coast of Jagua, it will
      wander a'league from the sea-shore to devour the
      hogs in the fields. Some attain a length of fifteen
      feet, and the most savage of them will, it is said,
      chase a man on horseback like the wolves of Europe
      —while those that are known as caymmies at Bata-
      bano, are so timid that the people do not fear to
      bathe in waters where they dwell in droves.
                                                        A TBIP TO TRINIDAD.
359
     These habits, and the name of eooodrilo, which is
  given in Cuba to th^s most dangerous of the carnivo-
  rous saurians, seem to me to indicate a different spe-
  cies from the great animals of the Orinoco and Mag-
  dalena rivers, and St. Domingo. The colonists in all
  other parts of Spanish .America, deceived by the
  exaggerated tales of the ferocity of the Egyptian cro
  codile, affirm that there are no true crocodiles except
  in the Nile; while zoologists have found in America
  the    cayman, with  obtuse snout and no scales on his
  legs, and the cocodrilo, with pointed snout and with
  scales on his legs. At the same time we find on the
  old continent, the common crocodile, and those of
  the Ganges, with rounded snout.
     The o'ocod-ilus acuta,s of St. Domingo, which I can-
  not now undertake to class specifically, and the coco-
  drilo of the great Orinoco and Magdalena rivers,
  have, in the words of Cuvier, so admirable a resem-
  blance to the crocodile of the Nile, that it lias been
  necessary to examine minutely every part, in order
  to show that the law of Buffon, relative to the distri-
  bution of species in the tropical regions of the two
  continents, was not defective.
     As on my second visit to Havana, in 1804,1 could
  not revisit the marshes of Batabano, I procured at
  a1 great expeuso specimens of the two species,
  which the inhabitants call cayman and cocodrilo#
         360                humboldt’s oxjba.
         Two of the latter reached Havana alive, the oldest
         being about four feet three .inches long. Their cap-
         ture had been very , difficult, and they were brought
         to the city muzzled, tied upon the back of a jack-
         mule. They were strong and ferocious, and in order
         to observe their habits and movements, wo put them
         in a large room, where, from the top of a high table,
         we could see them attacked by dogs.
            Having been for six months on the Orinoco,
       Apure, and Magdalena rivers, in the midst of coco-
       drilos, we observed with renewed pleasure, before
       our return to Europe, these singular animals, that
       pass with an astonishing rapidity from a state of
       complete immobility to the most impetuous motion.
       Those which were sent to us from Batabano as coco-
       drilos, had the snout as pointed as those of the
       Orinoco and Magdalena (Orocodihcs amtus, Guv.);
       their color was somewhat darker, being a blackish-
       green on the back, and white on the belly, with yel-
       low spots on the sides. I counted thirty-eight teeth
       in the upper, and thirty in the lower jaw, as in the
       true crocodile. Of the upper teeth, the ninth and
       tenth, and of the lower, the first and fourth, were
       the largest. The description which Bonpland and
       myself made on the spot at Costa Firma, expressly
       states tha,t the fourth lower tooth projects freely over ‘
       •the upper jaw; the posterior extremities were fiat-
                                                         A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
361
   tened. These cocodrilos of Batabano, seemed to us,
   specifically the same with the crocodilus acutus?
   although it is time that what we were told of its
   habits, does not accord with what we ourselves had
   observed on the Orinoco; but the carnivorous
   eaurians of like species, and in the same river, are
   mild and timid, or ferocious and fearless, according
   to the nature of the locality.
     The animal called cayman at Batabano, died on
   the way to Havana, and those in charge had not the
   foresight to bring the body to us, so that we were
   not able to compare the two species. Are there,
   perhaps, on the south side of Cuba true caymans,
   with the rounded snout, and the fourth under tooth
   entering the upper jaw; and another species (alli-
   gators), like those of Florida? In view of the
   assertions of the colonists relative to the more
   pointed head of the cocodrilo of Batabano, this is
   almost certain. If this is the case, the people of the
   island have made, by a happy instinct, a distinction
   between the cocodrilo and the cayman, with all the
   exactitude now used by zoologists in separating
   families that belong to the same genera, and bear
   the same name.
     I do not doubt that the sharp-snouted cocodrilo,
   and the alligator or flat-nosed cayman do not live
   together, but in distinct bands, on the marshy shores
                                          16
      362              humboldt’s  Cuba.
      between tbe bay of Jagua, Batabano, and the isle of
      Pines. It was at the latter that Dampier, so worthy
      of eulogy as a physiological observer and intrepid
      sailor, perceived clearly the great difference between
      the cayman and the American -cocodrilo. Ilis state-
      ments on this point, in his voyage to the bay of
      Campeachy, might have excited the curiosity of the
      learned a'1 century since, if zoologists would not so
      often reject, with disdain, the observations of navi-
      gators, and other travellers, who do not possess
      scientific attainments, relative to animals.. Dampier,
      after having noticed many of the characteristics,
      though not all with equal exactitude, that distinguish
      the cocodrilo from the cayman, insists upon the
      geographical distribution of these enormous sau-
      rians.
        “In the bay of Campeachy,” he says, “I have
      seen only caymans or alligators; in the island of
      Gran Cayman there are cocodrilos, and no alliga-
      tors ; in the isle of Pines, and in the numerous
      creeks of the coast of Cuba, there are cocodrilos
      and caymans together.” To these precious observa-
      tions of Dampier I will add, that the true cocodrilo
      (C. acutius) is also found in the Leeward Islands,
      which are near to Costa Firma, as, for example,
      Trinidad, Margarita, and probably also in Cura^oa,
      notwithstanding the scarcity of fresh water. It is
                                                         A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
363
 also found further south (but I have never found
with them any of the species of alligators that
abound on the coast of Guiana), in the Never!,
Magdalena, Apure, and the Orinoco, to the conflu-
ence of the Casiquiaro with the Itio Negro (lat.
2° 2'), which is more than four hundred leagues
from Batabano. It would be important to deter-
mine the limits of the several species of carnivorous
. saurians, on the eastern shore of Guatemala and
Mexico, between the Mississippi river and Cbagres.
   Before sunrise, on the ninth of March, we were
under way, somewhat intimidated by the extremely
small size of our schooner, on board of which we
could lie down only upon deck. The well-like cabin
received air and light from above, and barely
afforded room for our instruments; in it the therp
mometer stood constantly at 32° or 33° o. (90° or
92° F.). Fortunately, these inconveniences lasted
only twenty days, and the navigation of the
Orinoco in canoes, and a passage at sea on board of
an American vessel laden with beef which had
been dried in the Bun, had taught us not to be too
delicate.
   The Gulf of Batabano, surrounded by low and
marshy coasts, seems like a vast desert. The fisher
birds,.which generally are found at their posts before
the land birds, and the lazy            are awake,
  • t
  364
HUM- OLDT’S CUBA.
        are only occasionally seen. The water of the sea has
         a dark green color, as in some of the lakes of Switzer-
         land, while the sky, from the great purity of the
         atmosphere, had from the first appearance of the
         sun, that clear blue so much admired by landscape
         painters in the south of Italy; and through the pure
         air the most distant objects stood forth to the view
         with an extraordinary brilliancy.
           Our schooner was the only vessel in the gulf, for
         none enter the roadstead of Batabano but smugglers,
         or, as they are called, with greater courtesy, “ the tra-
         ders.” I have mentioned before, when speaking of the
         project of a canal through Guinea, how important Ba-
         tabano might become to the trade between Cuba and
         Venezuela. In its present state there are barely nine
         feet of water, as no attempt has been made to deepen
         it. The port is at the bottom of a bay formed by
         Punta Gorda on the east, and Punta de Salinas on the
         west; but the bay itself is only the concave side of
         a great gulf, which is fourteen leagues deep from
         north to 60ut,k, closed by an innumerable number of
         cays and banks for a distance of fifty leagues, from
         the bay of Cortez to Cay de Piedras.
           Within this labyrinth there rises one large island
         only, the area of which is four times greater than
         Martinique, and whose arid hills are crowned with
         majestic pines. This is the Isle of Pines, named the
                                                        A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
365
   “Evangelist” by Columbus, and the island of Santa
   Maria by other navigators of the sixteenth century.
   It is celebrated for the excellent mahogany which it
   produces.
      We sailed east-southeast through the Don Cristo-
   bal channel, to make the rocky shores of Cay de
   Piedras, and clear the archipelago which the Spanish
   pilots, from the earliest times of the conquest, have
   called the         Jardines and   Ja/r The true Jar-
   dines de la Rema (the Queen’s gardens), nearer to
   Cape Cruz, are divided from the archipelago which
   I am about to describe, by thirty-five leagues of open
   sea. Columbus gave them this name in 1494, when,
   during his second voyage, he was fifty-eight days
   struggling with the winds and currents between the
   Isle of Pines and the eastern cape of Cuba. He
   described these islands as being “ green, filled with
   trees, and very beautiful.”
      And in truth a portion of these misnamed gardens
   is very beautiful, for the voyager varies the scene
   momently, and the verdure of some of the islets
   borrows a new splendor from the contrast with others
   that present to the eye oidy white and arid sands.
   The surface of these, heated by the rays of the sun,
   seems to undulate as though it were water, and by
   the contact with the strata of air of unequal tempera-
       366              humboldt’s ouba.
       ture, produces from ten in the morning until four in
       the afternoon, all the varied phenomena of the
       mirage. In those desert solitudes it is the sun that
       animates the landscape, giving motion to the objects
       that glitter under his rays; the dusty plain, the trunks
       of trees, and the rocks jutting out into the sea.
       From the time of his rising these inert masses seem
       suspended in the air, and the sandy beaches present
       the deceitful spectacle of a watery plain gently agi-
       tated by the wind. A shred of cloud suffices to
       throw down alike, the trunks of trees and the sus-
       pended rocks, to still the undulating surface of the
       plain, and to dissipate those charms which the Ara-
       bian, Persian, and Indian poets, have celebrated in
       song as “ the sweet illusions of the desert soli-
       tude.”
         Wo doubled Cape Matahambre very slowly. As
       the chronometer of Louis Berthoud had kept time
       well in Havana, I improved the opportunity to deter-
       mine, on that and tl^e following days, the positions
       of the Don Cristobal, Flamenco, Diego Perez, and
       Piedras cays. 1 also found occupation in examining
       the influence of the varying depth upon the temper-
       ature of the surface water. Sheltered by so many,
       islets the surface is always calm, as if it were a lake
       of fresh water; the strata of different depths do not
                   ATRIP TO TRINIDAD.               367
    mingle with each other, and yet the slightest change
    in the soundings influence the thermometer.1
      I was surprised to find that east of the small cay
    Don Cristobal, the deep soundings are not marked
    by the' milky color of the water, as is the case on
    Shark Shoals south of Jamaica, and in many other,
    places where I have observed with the thermometer.
    The bottom of the Gulf of Batabano is a sand of
    decomposed coral, bearing sea-wreck that barely
    reaches to the surface. The water is greenish, as we
    have already noted, and the absence of the milky
    color arises, without doubt, from the perfect calm that
    reigns in these places; for wherever the water is
    agitated to a certain depth, a very tine sand, or the
    particles of limestone held suspended in the water,
    make it turgid and give it the milky tinge. Yet
    there are shoals which are not distinguished either
    by the color or the lower temperature of the sea, and
11 observed the following readings by Reaumcr’s thermometer :
Sea.   Air.     Depth.                                            
19° ,7 22° .8 10 feet. Eight milt;8 N. of Punta Govda.            
18° .8 28*.0  n “      Between Las Gordas and Don Cristobal Cays. 
19p.7  22\2   10 “     Near Cay Flamenco.                         
20 “.7 22® .0 80 “     Deep soundings between Cay Flamenco and    
                       Cay de Piedras.                            
19°.6  24“.2       9 “ Eastern margin of Bame, very near Cay de   
                       Piedras.                                   
18ft.2 24*.8  8 “      A little further east.                     
21°.5  23° .0 -        No bottom south of .Tagua. 1^.             
      368              humboldt’s  cuba.
      I believe these phenomena result from the nature .of
       a hard and rocky bottom, without sand or coral,'
       from the form and inclination of the foundations, the
       velocity of the currents, and' the absence of a com-
       municating motion in the lower strata of water.
       The low temperature generally indicated by the
       thermometer, on the surface of deep water, arises
       from the sinking of the heated particles caused by
       their diffusive movement and nocturnal cooling, and
       by the mingling of the deep strata which rise along
       the sides of the banks, as upon an inclined plain, to
       unite with the surface waters.
         Notwithstanding the small size of our craft, and
       the much praised skill of our pilot, we grounded
       very often; but as the bottom was soft, we incurred
       no danger. Yet at sunset it was thought best to
       anchor near the outlet of the Don Cristobal channel.
       The sky was admirably clear during the first part of'
       the night, and we saw a multitude of shooting stars
       landward of us, all passing in the same direction,
       counter to the east wind which then prevailed in the
       lower portions of the atmosphere. The solitude of
       these regions differs widely now from their appear-
       ance in the time of Columbus, when they were
       inhabited, and frequented by large numbers of
       fishermen. The natives of Cuba then availed them-
       selves of a small sucker-fish to catch the largo sea-
                                                     A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
369
    turtle, tying a long cord to tlie tail of the reves, a
    name which the Spaniards gave to this small member
    of the Echeneis genera.
      This, fisher-fish fastens itself to the shell of the tur-
    tle, which abound in the narrow and winding chan-
    nels of the Jardinillos, by a flat disc surrounded
    with suckers, which it bears upon its head.
    Columbus says, “the r&oes will suffer itself to be
    torn to pieces rather than be forced to lose any body
    of which it has taken hold.” Thus, with the same
    cord, the Indians drew forth the fisher-fish and the
    turtle. "When Gomara and Pedro Martir de Angli-
    era, the learned secretary of Charles V., related to
    Europe this fact which they had learned from the
    lips of the companions of Columbus, it was believed
    to be only a traveller’s tale.
       We now know by the evidence of Captain Rogers,
    of Dampier, and Commerson, that this same artifice,
    which was used in the Jardinillos, is practised by
    the inhabitants of the eastern coast of Africa near
    Cape Natal, in Mozambique and in Madagascar. In
    Egypt, in St. Domingo, and in the lakes of Mexico,
    men were accustomed to cover their heads with
    large perforated gourds, and lying with their bodies
    in the water, caught the water fowl by their feet as
    they swam upon its surface. The Chinese have
    availed themselves from the most remote antiquity,
                                    16*
370
humboldt’s cuba.
         of birds of the pelican family, for the purpose of
         fishing on the shores, placing rings around their
         £ecks to prevent their swallowing the prize and thus
         fishing only for themselves. In the lower grades of
         civilization, all the sagacity of man is displayed in
         the artifices of the chase and fishery. Nations that
         probably have never communicated with each other,
         present the most palpable analogies in the means they
         adopt to subdue the animal creation.
           Three days passed before we could emerge from
         the labyrinth of the Jardines and Jardinillos. We
         were every night at anchor, and during the day
         visited those islets or cays, where we could most
         easily land. As we advanced toward the east, the
         sea become less smooth, and we began to recognize
         the shallows by the milky color of the water. Upon
         the margin of a kind of whirlpool which exists
         between Cay Flamenco and Cay de Piedras, we
         found that the temperature of the sea at the surface,
         suddenly increased from 23°.5 to 25°.8 C. (74°.3 to
         78°.4 F.)
           The geognostic constitution of the small islands
         that surround the Isle of Pines was the more inte-
         resting to me, from the fact that I was slow to believe
         the accounts of the coral structures of Polynesia,
         .that were said to rise from the profound depths of
         the ocean to the surface of the water; for it seemed to
371
                                                           A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
      me more probable that those enormous masses were
      founded upon some primitive or .volcanic rock, to
      which they were attached at a small depth. The
      limestone formation of Guinea, partly compact and
      lithographic, and partly spongy, continued to Bata-
      bano. It is very similar to the limestone formation
      of the Jura, and if we may judge simply by the
      external appearance, the Cayman islands are com-
      posed of the same rock. If the mountains of the
      Isle of Pines which present, according to the early
      historians of the conquest, the pine and palm toge-
      ther, are visible at a distance of twenty leagues, their
      height must be more than 3,200 feet; and I have been
      assured that they are composed also of a limestone
      similar to that of Guinea.                       (   *
         From these facts, I expected to find the same rock
      (Jurassic) in the Jardinillos; but I have only found,
      on examining the cays, which rise usually five or six
      inches above the surface of the water, a fragmentary
      rock in which regular lumps of coral are cemented,
      together with a quartz sand. Sometimes the frag-
      ments had a volume of one or two cubic feet, and
      the grains of sand have so completely disappeared,
      that one might believe that the lithophite polypus
      had remained there in numerous layers. The mass
      of this group of cays appeared to me to be a true
      agglomerate limestone, quite analogous to the ter-
      372                iiumboldt’s cub a.
      tiary limestone of- the peninsula of Araya, near
      Cumana, but of a more recent formation. The
      inequalities of these coral rocks, are filled with the
      detritus of shells and madrepore. All that rises
      above the surface of the sea is composed of broken
      lumps cemented by carbonate of lime, in which
      grains of quartz sands are held. I do not know if,
      under this fragmentary coral rock, structures of
      . living polypus are to be found, at a groat depth, and
      whether they adhere to the Jurassic formation..
         Mariners believe that the sea gradually diminishes
      in depth* in this vicinity, perhaps because they per-
      ceive the cays to grow and rise up, either'from the
      sandbanks which the beating of the waves forms, or
      by successive agglutinations. Besides, it might,not
      be impossible, that the widening of the Bahama
      channel, through which the waters of the Gulf
      Stream emerge, should cause in the lapse of time,
      a slight lowering of the level of the sea on the south
      side of Cuba, and particularly of the Gulf of Mexico,
      the. centre of the great whirlpool of that pelagian
      river which washes the shores of the United States,
      and casts the fruits of tropical plants on the coasts
      of Norway.
         The form of the coasts, the direction, force, and
      duration of certain currents, and certain winds, and
      the variations they experience from the changeable
                                                        A TRIP TO TRINIDAD,
373
    nature of the forces affecting them, are causes the
    concurrence of which for a long time within narrow
    and shallow limits might alter the equilibrium of
    the sea.1 When the shores are so low that the level
    of the country for a league inland, varies only a few
    inches, these risings and fallings of the sea excite the
    imaginations of the inhabitants.
       Cay Bonito (Beautiful Cay), which was the first .I
    visited, is worthy of its name from the force of its
    vegetation. Everything indicates that it has been a
    long time above the surface of the ocean, for the
    interior of the cay is hardly lower than its 'margin.
    From a layer of sand and broken shells, covering
    the fragmentary coral rock to the depth of five or
    six inches, a forest of mangroves rises, which when
    seen from a distance, seem from their height and
    foliage to be laurel trees. The avicennia nitida,
    batis, small euphorbia, and several grassy plants,
    serve to fix the movable sand with their roots. But
    what particularly characterizes the flora of these
       11 do not pretend to explain, by these same causes, the phenomena
     which we see on the coast of Sweden, where the sea has the appear-
     ance of an unequal fall at several points, amounting to from three
     to five feet in the century. A supposed analogy has occurred to the
     inhabitants of Dutch Guiana.—Bolingbroke} Voyage to Demarara,
     p, 148.—H.
          374                Humboldt’s Cuba.
          .coral islands1 is the* beautiful .silver-leaved tourne-
          fortia giuvpluilioides of Jaequin, which, I first found
          there. It is not a solitary plant, and forms a tree
          four or five feet in "height, its flowers having an
          agreeable odor. It also adorns Cay Flamenco, Cay
          de Piedras, and perhaps the greater part of the low
          islands of the Jardinillos;
            "While we were engaged in botanizing our sailors
          sought for sea crabs, and irritated with ill success,
          they soothed their anger by climbing the mangrove
          trees, and committing terrible havoc among the
          young alcatraces, which were snugly ensconced in
          pairs- in the nests. Throughout Spanish America,
          this name is applied to the blackish, swan-sized peli-
          can of Buffon. The alcati'az, with that jmdolence
          and stupid confidence which characterizes the larger
          sea birds, forms its nest by twining together a few
           1 We gathered: Cenchrus myosuroidcs, Euphorbia buxifolia, Batis
         maritima, Iresine obtusifolia, Tournefortia gnapkalioides, Diomedea
         glabrata, Cakile cubensis, Dolichos miniatus, Partkenium hystcro-
         phorus, etc. This latter plant, which we found iu the valley of
         Caraccas, and on the temperate plains of Mexico, between elevations
         of three thousand and six thousand feet, grows iu all the fields of
         Cuba. The inhabitants use it. for aromatic baths, and to destroy
         fleas, which so abound within the tropics. In Cnmana many species
         of Casia are used, for their odor, against these troublesome
         insects.—13.
                    A TKIP TO TRINIDAD.             375
    twigs only, and we often found four or five of these
    in one tree. The young birds defended themselves
    valiantly with their hills, which were already six or
    seven inches long, while tho old ones flew above our
    heads uttering hoarse and mournful cries; but tfie
    streams of blood continued to trickle down tho trees,
    for the sailors were armed with clubs and cutlasses.
    Though we expostulated with them against this
    cruelty and useless tormenting, they would not
    desist; these men, accustomed to long obedience in
    the solitude of the sea, take a singular pleasure in
    exercising a cruel dominion over the animal crea-
    tion whenever an opportunity presents itself. The
    ground was covered with wounded birds, struggling
    with death, so that this retired spot, which before
    our arrival was the abode of peace, seemed now to
    exclaim, Man has entered here.
      The sky was covered with a reddish vapor, which
    began to dissipate in tho southwest, and we enter-
    tained the disappointed hope of seeing the Isle of
    Pines. These regions possess a charm that is want-
    ing in the greater part of the New World, for they
    recall to the mind memories which cluster round tho
    greatest names of the Spanish monarchy: Columbus
    and Ilernan Cortes. .It was on the southern coast
    of the island of Cuba, between the Bay of Jagua and
    the Isle of Pines, that Columbus, during Iris second
376
humboldt’s ouba.
          voyage, beheld with admiration “that mysterious'
          king who communicated with his subjects by signs
          only, and that group of men wearing long white
          gowns, like begging friars, while all the rest of the
          people were naked.”
             On his fourth voyage lie met at the Jardinillos,
          the pirogues of the Mexican Indians, laden with
          tho rich products and merchandise of Yucatan.
          Deceived by his ardent imagination, he seemed to
          hear from the lips of these navigators, ‘^that they
          had come from a land where men rode upon horses,
          and wore crowns of gold upon their heads.”
          “ Already Cathay, the empire of tho Gran Khan, and
          the mouths of the Ganges,” seemed to be near to
          him, and he hoped soon to avail himself of the two*
          Arabian interpreters, which he had taken on board
          at Cadiz when departing for America.' 1
            1 Compare Letter a rarisissima di Christoforo Colombo di 7 di
          Julio, 1503, p. 2, with Herrera, Dec. 1, pp. 125-131. Nothing can
          be more tender or more pathetic, than the sorrowful tone that per-
          vades this letter of Columbus, written at Jamaica, to the Catholic
          monarchs Ferdinand and Isabel. I particularly recommend to all
          who wish to study the character of that extraordinary man, his nar-
          rative of the nocturnal vision, when, in the midst of the tempest, a
          celestial voice soothed and cheered him with these words: u God
          made thy name to resound marvellously throughout the earth. The
          Indies, which is the richest portion of tho earth, He has given thee
          for thine; thou hast divided it as thou wouldst, and He gave thee
A TEir TO TRINIDAD.
377
         Other memories that hover round the isle of
      Pines, belong to the conquest of Mexico. When
      Hernan Cortes was collecting his great expedition,
      his ship, the Capitana, grounded oil one bf the reefs
      of the Jardinilios, while sailing from the port of
      Trinidad for Cape San Antonio. For five days she
      was. supposed to be lost, when the brave Pedro
      de Alvarado sent (in November, 1518) from the
      port of Carenas1 (Havana) three vessels to his assis-
      power so to do. To the boundaries of the ocean, that were closed
      with a mighty chain, He gave thee the key,” etc. These lines, so
      full of sublime sentiment and poetry, have reached us only by an
      ancient Italian translation, for the Spanish original, cited in the
      “Nautical Biblioteca” of Don Antonio Leon, has not yet been
      found. We may add other expressions, full of candor, from the lips
      of him who discovered the New World. “Your highness may
      believe me,” he said, “ the globe of the world is no.t, by very much,
      so large as the vulgar suppose.” On the same occasion, he says,
      “Seven years did I remain at your court, and during all that time I
      was told that my scheme was madness itself. Now, when I have
      opened the way, even tailors and shoemakers ask for grants to go
      and discover new lands. Persecuted and forgotten as I am, I never
      think upon Espanola and Paria, but my eyes fill with tears. Twenty
      years have I been in the service of your highness, and all my locks
      have whitened, my body has become weak, and now I cannot weep j
      weep for this, heaven, and weep for me, earth j weep for me who-
      ever has charity, truth, justice.”—Lett. rar. pp. 13, 19, 34, 37.—H.
      The reader will find this letter, in Spanish, in Navarrete’s ilCole-
      cion de Viages<fco., vol. 1, page 299 et sequiter. •
                  1 At that time there were two settlements,'one at the port of
        378                  iiumboldt’s   cub a.
        tance., .Subsequently, in February, 1519, Cortes
        gathered his fleet near Oape San Antonio, probably
        at the place which still bears the name of Bay of
        Cortes, west of Batabano, and opposite the Isle of
        Pines. From that place, where he could more
        easily free himself from the trammels which the
        governor, Velasquez, was preparing to throw around
        him, he sailed, almost clandestinely, for the shores
        of Mexico. Strange vicissitudes of human affairs!
        A handful of men, landing from the extreme west
        of Cuba upon the coast of Yucatan,-tore down the
        empire .of Montezuma; and in our time, three centu-
        ries later, this same Yucatan, which is part of the con-
        federation of independent Mexican States, has almost
        menaced a conquest of the western shores of Cuba.1 '
        Carenas, m the ancient Indian province of Ilabana (Herrera, Dec.
        1, pp. 27G-277), and another, the greatest, at the city of San Cristo-
        bal de Cuba. In 1519 the two settlements were united, and the port
        of Carenas took the name of San Cristobal de la Ilabana. “ Cortes,”
        says Herrera (Dec. 11, pj*. 80 and 95), “went to the village of San
        Cristobal, which, at that time, was on the south coast, and afterwards
        went to Havana.”—H.
          1 Humboldt, probably, alludes here to the secret society of “The
        Black Eagle,” which had its principal centre in Mexico, but
        extended its ramiUcations throughout Cuba, its object being to
        achieve the independence of that islaud. It was discovered and
        suppressed about the time of his writing, 1825, when its plans had:
        very nearly reached maturity, and many eminent Cubans were
        forced to flee their country.
                           A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.                 379
           On the 11th of March, we visited Cay Flamenco.
        I found its latitude to be 21° 59' 39". The centre of
        the island is low, rising only fourteen inches above
        the level of the sea. The water on it is brackish,
        while that on the other cays is perfectly fresh. The
        mariners of Cuba, as well as the inhabitants of the
        lagoons of Venice, and some modern physiologists,
        attribute this absence of salt to the action of the
        sand as the water filters through it. But how is this
        action exerted, where its supposed existence is not
        justified by any chemical analogy? Besides, these
        cays are composed of rocks, and not of sand; and
        their small extent presents an objection to the sup-
        position that it is rain water which has gathered and
        remains standing. Perhaps the fresh water on the
        cays flows from the adjacent coast, or even from the
        mountains of . Cuba, by the effect of hydrostatic
        pressure. This would prove that the strata of Juras-
        sic limestone extends under the sea, and that the
        coral rock is superposed on the limestone.1
          The belief that every spring of fresh or salt water
          1 The ancients were acquainted, with these eruptions of freshwater
        in the sea, near Bayas, Syracuse, and Arado (Phoenicia). The coral
        islands that surround Rndak, particularly the very low island of
        Otdia, also contain fresh water. A careful examination of these
        phenomena at the level of the sea, cannot be too strongly recom-
        mended to travellers.—H.
380
HUMBOLDT S CUBA.
        is a local phenomenon, is an error that is too widely
        disseminated, for currents of water circulate in the
        interior of the earth, for long distances, between
        strata of peculiar density or nature, as do the rivers
        that wear the surface of the globe. Don Francisco
        Lernaur, the learned engineer, who subsequently dis-
        played such energy and valor in the defence of the
        castle of San Juan de Ulua, informed me that in the
        bay of Jagua, half a degree east of the Jardinillos,
        springs of fresh water are found boiling up in the
        midst of the sea, two and a half leagues from the
        shore.1 The water rushes from these springs with
        sufficient force to cause a dashing of the waves,
        making the vicinity dangerous for small canoes.
        Vessels that do not wish to go into the harbor of
        Jagua, sometimes fill their casks at those sea foun-
        tains, and the water is more or less cold according as
        they take it near to, or far from the bottom. The-
        Manatees (sea calves}, guided by their instinct, have
        discovered this region of fresh Avater, and the fisher-
        men, Avho are very fond of the flesh of these cetaceos
         1 Similar springs of fresh water occur in the bay of Cardenas, on
       the north coast of Cuba, springing forth with such< strength that
       fresh water can be dipped up with a bucket, in the midst of the sea
       water. We have been told that in some parts of that town, running
       water is found under th.e earth, on sinking wells a short dis-
       tance.
 /
                                                        A TJRIP TO TRINIDAD.
381
        Zierlworos, find them there in abundance, and kill
        them in the open sea.1
          About half a mile from Cay Flamenco, we sailed
        near two rocks level with the sea, against which the
          1 The following is Dampier's clear description of this animal,
        which is still found in some places on the south side of Cuba: “ ThiS
        creature is about the bigness of a horse, and ten or twelve feet long.
        The mouth of it is much like the mouth of a cow, having great,
        thick lips. The eyes are no bigger than a small pea; the ears are
        only two small holes in the Bide of the head. The neck is short and
        thick, bigger than the head. The biggest part of this creature is at
        the shoulders, where it hath two large fins on each side of its belly.
        Under each of these fins the female hath a small dug to suckle its
        young. From the shoulders, towards its tail, it retains its bigness
        for about a foot, then groweth smaller and smaller to the very tail,
        which is flat, and about fourteen inches broad, and twenty inches
        long, and the middle four or five inches thick, but about the edges
        it is not above two inches thick. From the head to the tail it is
        round and smooth, without any fin but those two before mentioned.
        I have heard that some weigh twelve hundred pounds, but I never
        saw any so large. The Manatee delights to live in brackish water,
        and they are commonly in creeks and rivers near the sea. * * *
        They live on grass seven or eifht inches long, which grows in the
        sea in many places. They never come on shore, nor into shallow-
        water where they cannot swim. Their flesh is white, both the fat
        and the lean, and extraordinary sweet, wholesome meat. The skin
        of the bull, or of the back of the cow, is very thick, and of it they
        make horsewhips. While the thongs are green, they twist them, and
        hang them to dry, which, in a week's, time, become as hard as
        wood."— Voyas Round the World, vol. 1, p. 33.
uumboldt’s ouba.
                                                                                 3S2
       waves dash, loudly. They were the Piedras de Diego
       Perez. The temperature of the sea, at the surface,
       fell there to 22°.0 C. (72°.7 F.), the depth of water
       being only six and a half feet. In the afternoon, we
       reached Cay de Piedras, which is formed by two
       rocks with breakers between, running X.hi.E. and
       W.S.W. As these two rocks are some distance
       apart (forming the eastern side of the J ardinillos),
       many vessels are lost upon them. - The cay has
       hardly any trees upon it, for thoso who are ship-
       wrecked there, have cut them down in their need
       to make signal fires. The shore is very steep toward
       the sea, but near the middle there is a small channel
       with still water.
         We found inclosed in the rock a lump! of madre-
       pore, more than three cubic feet in size; and we
       entertained no doubt that the limestone formation,
       which from a distance appears much like the Juras-
       sic limestone, was a fragmentary rock. It is desira-
       ble that geognostic * travellers should some day
       examine the entire chain of cays that surround the
       island of Cuba, in order to determine what is duo to
       the insects that still labor in the depths of the sea,
       and what belongs to the true tertiary formations,
       whose epoch approaches very nearly with that of the
       coarse limestono which abounds among the remains
       of the coral lithoplutes. That which generally rises
F
                        A TKIP TO TEfNIDAD. .             383
       above the sea is usually nothing more than a species
    of marble, or a collection , of fragments of madrepore,
    cemented by carbonate of lime, with broken shells
    and sand. It is important' to examine, in each cay,
    upon what this class of rock rests; if it rises from
    works of still living mollusca, or from those second-
    ary and tertiary rocks, which, from the -appearqpce
    and preservation of the coral remains they contain,
    might be supposed to be modern productions. The
    1 ■ gypsum of the cays off San Jnan de los Remedios,-
    on the northern coast of Cuba, is worthy of great
    attention; for its epoch surely ascends beyond the
    era of history, and no geognostic observer will deem
    it to be the.product of the mollusca of our seas.
          It was from Cay de Piedras that we iirst saw,
      toward the east-northeast, the high mountains that
      rise back of the bay of Jagua. We again passed
      the night at anchor, and on the following morning,
      the 12th of March, running out between the north
      point of Cay de Piedras and the coast of Cuba, wo
      entered upon the clear and (Open sea. Its deep blue
      ■ color, and increased temperature, proved to us the
      much greater depth of the water. The thermometer,
      which, in soundings of six and a half, and eight feet
      of water, wo had often found at 22°.6 C. (72°.7 F.),
      now rose to 2G°.2 C. (79° F.), while during these
      observations it stood in the air at from 25° to 27° C. -
      (77° to Sl)°.6 F.). Availing ourselves of the varia-
384
humboldt’b cuba.
           tions of the land and sea breezes, we kept to the
           eastward as far as the port of Trinidad, in order to
           take advantage during our voyage to Carthagena,
           of the constant northeast winds which then pre-
           vailed.
             Passing the marshy coast of Camareos, where
           Bartolome de las Casas, so celebrated for his
           humanity and noble valor, obtained in 1514, from
           his friend Yelasquez the governor, a good assign-
           ment of Indians,1 we arrived off the bay of Jagua.
           This harbor is one of the most excellent, and at the
           same time least frequented in the island. “There
           may not be another like it in the world,” said the
           old chronicler, Antonio de Herrera; and the surveys
           and plans for its defence, made by Senor Lemaur,
           under commission from the Count de Jaruco, have
           demonstrated that the haven of Jagua is worthy of
           the celebrity it has obtained from the times of the
           conquest. A hamlet and a small castle is all that is
           yet found there, but they serve to prevent the Eng-
           lish from careening their ships in the harbor, as they
           did, without concern, during the war with Spain.3
                  1 He renounced it in the same year during a short stay in Jamaica,
               from conscientious scruples.—II.
                  a The flourishing town of Cieufucgos now stands upon the borders
               of this fine harbor, which is the scene of an active commerce at the
               present time, and the germ of rich promise for the future.
                                                        A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
385
               East of Jagua the hills of San Juan approach the
           coast, and present a very majestic appearance, not
           so much from their height, which does not exceed
           1,900 feet,1 as from their steep declivities aud gene-
           ral, form. I was told that the shore, as far as the
           mouth of the Guaurabo river, is so bold and steep
           that a ship may lie alongside it at any point. In the
           evening, when the temperature of the sea fell to
           23° 0. (73°.4 F.), and the breeze came from the land,
           we perceived that delightful fragrance of flowers and
           honey, so characteristic of the shores of Cuba.’
           We sailed along the coast, at a distance of two or
           three miles, and just before sunset, on the 13th of
           March, we found ourselves off the mouth of the
           river San Juan, so much feared by mariners because
             1 Estimated distance three marine leagues. Angle of altitude,
           not corrected for the curve of the earth and refraction, 1° 47' 10".
           Height, 1745 feet—II.
             9 I have already observed that the wax of Cuba, which is an
           important article in its commerce, is due to the bees of Europe (of
           the genus Apis, Latr.).. Columbia expressly says, that in his time
           the natives of Cuba did not gather wax. The great cake of this
           substance, which lie found in the island on his first voyage, and
           which was presented to King Ferdinand, in the celebrated audience
           at Barcelona, was found afterwards, to have been brought by Mexican
           pirogues from Yucatan. It is curious to observe that the wax of
           the Meliponcs was the first Mexican production that fell into the
           hands of the Spaniards, m the month of,November, 1432,—H.
                                         IT
386
                          Humboldt’s odba.
          of the innumerable mosquitoes and sand-flies that
          fill the air.
            The mouth of the river looks like the break of a
          deep ravine, in which large vessels might enter,
          were it not for a shoal that closes the channel This
          port is much frequented by smugglers from
          Jamaica, and oven by pirates from New Providence.
          The hills which rise back of it have a height of
          about 1,450 feet. I passed a great portion of the
          night upon deck. What lonely shores are these,
          where not even the light of a fisherman’s hut is to
          be seen! From Batabano to Trinidad, a distance
          of fifty leagues, there is not a single village, and
          only two or three farms where swine and cattle are
          reared; yet in the time of Columbus, that land was
          inhabited along its whole extent of shore. When
          wells are dug here, and when torrents of water,
          during the heavy rains, wash the surface of the
          earth, stone hatchets and a few copper utensils' are
          found, the only remains of the ancient inhabitants of
          the place.
            'Doubtless, from the copper of Cuba, for the abundance of this
          metal, in a native state, must have stimulated the Indians of Cuba
          and Hayti to smelt *t. Columbus states, “that in Hayti, masses of
          native copper of one hundred and fifty pounds weight were found,
          and that the pirogues of Yucatan, which he met on the south coast
          of Cuba, carried umong other Mexican merchandise, crucibles for
          smelting copper.”-—Herrera, Dec. 1, pp. 86 & 131.—H.
                                                        A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
387
                          At sunrise, I persuaded our captain to sound, and
         at sixty fathoms we did not reach bottom. The
         temperature of the surface water was much warmer
         than we had found it elsewhere, being 26°.8 C., (80°
         F.), exceeding by 4°.2 C. our observations near the
         breakers of Diego Perez. Half a mile from the
         shore, the water was only 25°.5 C., (78° F.), and
         although we had no opportunity to sound, I do not
         doubt that the depth was less. On the 14th of
         March, wo entered the river Guaurabo, one of the
         ports of Trinidad, to land the Batabano pilot who
         had run us on the mud so often while crossing the-
         banks of the Jardinillos. We also hoped to find
         there a mail packet, under whose convoy Wo might
         sail to Carthagena. I landed in the- afternoon, and
         set on the beach Bordas’ dip-needle, and an artificial
         horizon, in order to observe the passage of several
         stars across the meridian; but we had hardly begun
         our preparations, when some Catalan shop-keepers,
         who had been dining on board a foreign vessel
                              ° n                                        . .
         which. had lately, arrived, invited ns with many
         demonstrations of pleasure to accompany them to
         the city. These honest people made us mount, two
         on each horse, and as the heat was excessive we did
         not hesitate to accept their frank and simple offer.
                                Trinidad is four miles from the mouth of the
                                Guaurabo in a northeast direction, and the road
          388              humboldt’s ouba.
          runs through a plain apparently formed by long-
          standing water. It is covered with a beautiful
          vegetation, to which the Mimguamay a species of
          palm with shining leaves, which *we there saw for
          the first time, gives a peculiar character. This
          fertile land, although of the red soil, only waits the
          hand of man to clear and cultivate it, when it will
          yield abundant. crops. Toward the west there is a
          picturesque view of the hills of San Juan, which
          form a limestone chain very steep on its southern
          side, and some 1,800 or 2,000 feet high, their naked
          and' arid summits now .rounded and now forming high
          and steep peaks.1
            Though the temperature falls very low here
          during the season of the northers it never snows,
          but frost and hail only are sometimes seen in these
          mountains, and in those of St. Jago. I have spoken
          elsewhere of the difficulty of explaining this absence.
          On leaving the wooers a curtain of hills is seen, the
          southern 'slope of which is covered with houses.
          This is the city of Trinidad, founded by Diego
          Velasquez in 1514, stimulated thereto by the rich
          gold mines said to have been discovered in the little
                1 Wherever the rock is seen, I have found a compact whitish-brown
             limestone, in part porous, and in part with Binooth fractute, like the
             Jurassic formation—II.
A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
389
         valley of the Arimao river.1 All the streets of
         Trinidad are very steep, and the inhabitants there
         complain, as they also do in the greater part of
         Spanish America, of the bad selection made by the
         conquerors of sites for the towns they founded.8
         The church of Nuestra Senora de la Popa, a celebra-
         ted place foT pic-nics, stands on the northern side of
         the town.
           Its site appeared to me to be about seven hundred
         feet above the level of the sea, and commands, as do
         also the greater part of the streets in the town, a
         magnificent view of the ocean, the two ports,
         Casilda and Guaurabo, a forest of palms, and the high
         group of the hills of Sail Jnan. As I had forgotten
         to bring the barometer and other instruments to the
         city, I endeavored on the following morning to
         ascertain the height of the hill on which the church
         stands, by taking alternate altitudes of the sun above
           1 This river empties into the bay of Jagua, on its eastern side.—II.
           8 May not the city begun b$ Velasquez, have, perhaps', been
         founded in tile plain, nearer to the ports of Casilda and Guaurabo?
         Many of the inhabitants suppose that the fear of the French,
         Portuguese, and English pirates (,Jlibustiers), induced the selection
         of an inland site upon the sides of the hills, from whence, as from a
         high tower, the approach of the enemy might be discovered ; but it
         seems to me that these fears could not have existed before the time '
         of Hernando de Soto (1538). The city of Havana was first sacked
         by the French corsairs, in 1539.—II.
390
iiumboldt’s cub a..
        the horizon of the sea, and above an artificial hori-
        zon. I had practised this method at the castle of
        Murviedro, the ruins of Saguntum, and Cape Blanco
        near La Guaira: but the sea horizon was clouded,
        and broken in several places by dark streaks, which
        indicated the existence of small currents of air, or a
        series of extraordinary refractions.1
           We were entertained in Trinidad at the house of
        Seiior Munoz, the collector of customs, with a charm-
        ing hospitality. I continued my observations during
        the greater part of the night under rather unfavor-
        able circumstances, and found the latitude near the
        cathedral to be 21° 48' 20". My chronometrical longi-
        tude was 82° 21' 7". I learned on my second visit
        to Havana, on my return from Mexico, that this longi-
        tude was very nearly the same witli that observed by
        Captain Jose del Bio, who long resided there, and
        also that that officer placed the latitude of the city
        in 21° 42' 40". 1 have discussed tins disagreement
        in another work, and it will suffice to note here that
        Mon. Pnysegur found the latitude to be 21° 47' 15",
          1 In the opinion of the great naturalist, Wollaston, whom I had the
        pleasure of consulting relative to this curious phenomenon, these black
        streaks consist, probably, of that portion of the atmosphere nearest
        to the surface of the ocean when the wind begins to ruffle it. In
        this case, the true' horizon, which was more distant, would be made
        invisible to the eye by the opposition of color.—II. <
                         A TKIP TO TRINIDAD.               391
        and that observations of four stars in the Great Bear,
        made by Gamboa, gave to Mon. Oltmanns while
        ascertaining the declination according to PiazzTs
        catalogue, a latitude of 21° 46' 25/'
           The lieutenant governor of Trinidad, whose juris-
        diction then comprised Villa Clara, Santi Espiritu,
        and Puerto Principe, was a nephew of the celebrated
        astronomer, Don Antonio Ulloa. He gave us a great
        dinner at which we met several of the French
        refugees from St. Domingo, who had brought hither
        only their industry and their intellectual acquire-
        ments. The export of sugar from Trinidad, accord-
        ing to the returns made up at Havana* did not then
        exceed four thousand boxes. The inhabitants com-
        plained of the impediments which the general
        government, in its unjust preference for Havana,
        placed in the way of the agricultural and commer-
        cial development of the Central and Eastern districts
        of the island ; as also of the great accumulation of
        wealth, population, and authority at the capital,
        while the rest of the country was almost a wilder-
        ness. Many minor centres, distributed at regular
        distances through the island, were preferred to the
        prevailing system, which had resulted in attracting
        to a single point, wealth, corruption of manners, and
        the yellow fever. Similar exaggerated accusations,
        and complaints of provincial cities against the capi-
392
                        humboldt’s cuba.
         tal, occur in all countries. It cannot be doubted
        that in political organizations, as in physical, the
        general welfare depends upon the uniform distribu-
        tion of the partial life; but we must distinguish
        between the preeminence which flows from the
        natural course of things, and that which results from
        the policy and acts of the government.
           Discussions have often arisen at Trinidad, as to
        which of the two ports is the best; and perhaps it
        would be better if the municipal council should
        endeavor to improve either one of them with the
        small amount of means at its command. The dis-
        tance of the city from Oasilda, and from the mouth
        of the Guaurabo, is very nearly the same, but the
        cost of transportation of goods is greatest to the
        former.1 The mouth of the Guaurabo, defended by
        a newly erected battery, has a safe anchorage, but it
        is not so well sheltered as that of Casilda.
           Vessels of light draught can ascend the river to
        within a mile of the city. The mail packets to Costa
        Fijme generally prefer the Guaurabo, as they can
        enter it safely without a pilot.
           The port of Casilda is more enclosed by the land,
        but cannot be entered without a local pilot, because
          1 A railroad now runs from the city to Casilda, whioh has been
        much improved.
                       A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.            393
      of the. Mulas and Mulatto reefs. The great wharf
      which was built of wood, and was formerly very
      useful to commerce, was injured while landing some
      large pieces of artillery, and is now entirely de-
      stroyed ; doubtless it would he better to rebuild it
      of stone, as proposed by Don Luis de Bassecourt, or
      to deepen the bar of the Guaurabo by dredging.
      The great fault of the port of Casilda, is the want of
      fresh water, which shipping must procure on the
      other side of its western point, exposing them to
      capture by privateers in time of war. We were
      assured that the population of Trinidad, and the
      plantations around it within a radius of one league,
      amounted to nineteen thousand souls. The cultiva-
      tion of sugar and coffee has increased greatly, but
      the cereals' of Europe are grown only further north
      toward Villa Clara.
        We passed the evening very agreeably'at the
      residence of Don Antonio Padron, one of the most
      wealthy inhabitants, where we met nearly all the
      principal residents of Trinidad. We again wpre
      surprised, as we had been at the capital, with the
      mirthfulness and quick intelligence of the Cuban
      ladies. These are happy, natural gifts, which the
      refinement of European civilization may make more
      attractive, but which are extremely pleasing in their
      primitive simplicity.
                                 17*
       394               humboldt’s  ouba.
         On the evening of the 15th of March,, we left
       Trinidad, and our departure was widely different
       from our arrival, on horseback with the Catalan
       shopkeepers. The municipal council sent us to the
       mouth of the Guaurabo in a coach lined with ancient
       red damask; and to increase the embarrassment we
       felt, an ecclesiastic, who was also the poet of the
       place, dressed throughout in velvet notwithstanding
       the great heat, celebrated in a sonnet our voyage to
       the Orinoco. On the way to the harbor we were sin-
       gularly surprised with a spectacle which a residence
       of more than two years in the tropics should have
       made familiar to us.
         Nowhere else have I seen such an innumerable
       quantity of fireflies' (cocwyos) for trees, branches,
       and leaves glowed with them in their brilliant and
       moving light, the intensity of which varies with the
       will of the insect that produces it; it seemed to me
       as though the starry vault of heaven had fallen
       upon the plain. In the habitations of the poorer
       classes in the county, a dozen of these insects placed
       in a perforated gourd, suffice for a light during the
       night. By shaking the gourd quickly, the insect is
       roused, and lights up the luminous discs which are
       placed on each side of its head. The inhabitants 1
                        1 Elatcr noctilucus.—H.
                     A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.             395
     employ a truthful and simple expression, in saying
     that a gourd tilled with cocuyos is an ever-lighted
     torch; and in fact it is only extinguished by the
     death of the insects which are easily kept alive
     with a little sugar cane. A lady in Trinidad told
     us that during a long and painful passage from
     Costa Firme, she had availed herself of these phos-
     phorescent insects whenever she wished to give the
     breast to her child at night. The captain of the
     ship would not permit any other light on board at
     night, for fear of the privateers.
       As the breeze continued to freshen, and haul
     steadily to the northeast, we laid our course so as to
     clear the Cayman islands, but the current swept us
     toward them. Steering south quarter east, we soon
     lost sight of the palm-covered shore, of the hills
     that rise over Trinidad, and finally of the high
     mountains of Cuba. There is something impressive
     in the contemplation of a land which one is leaving,
     as it sinks, steadily and slowly beneath the horizon
     of the sea. This impression was increased to us, in
     its interest and grave import, at this time, when St.
     Domingo, then the centre of great political agita-
     tion, threatened to involve the surrounding islands in
     one of those bloody struggles which demonstrate to
     man the ferocity of his nature. Happily these
     fears and menaces were not realized, for the tempest
       396                humboldt’s  cuba.
       lulled in the land that gave it birth, and a free black
       population, instead of disturbing the repose of the
       neighboring islands, has made some progress towards
       a suavity of manners, and the establishment of good
       civil institutions.1
                                Haiti is surrounded by Cuba, Porto Rico, and
                                Jamaica, with a population of 370,000 white and
       885,000  blacks, while she contains 900,000 blacks
       and mulattoes, who have freed themselves by their
       own will, and the good fortune of their arms. These
       negroes, engaged much more in the cultivation of
       alimenticious plants than of colonial staples, increase
       with a rapidity that is exceeded only by the popu-
       lation of the United States. Will the tranquillity
       which the Spanish and English islands have enjoyed,
       during the twenty-six years that have passed since
        1 How sad to contemplate, in the present debased condition of the
      Haitian blacks, the failure of these noble and humane hopes. Yet
      the erroneous social theories upon which they are based, have been
      extended by the governments of Europe over many of the islands
      of the Antilles, and Cuba, and Porto Rico alone remain, unab-
      sorbed in the black abyss of barbarism, whose waves have rolled
      over the other West Indian isles, extinguishing the lights of
      their civilization, and the hopes of their humanity. We may here
      read the instructive lesson, that the principles upon which a social
      organism is based, cannot be violently changed without destroying
      Rb vital principle, and bringing desolation and death to the-tempo-
      ral and spiritual interests of Its members.
                                                        A TRIP TO TRINIDAD.
397
      the first revolution in Haiti, continue to inspire the
   whites with that fatal security, which disdainfully
   resists any improvement in the state of the servile
   class? On every side of that Mediterranean of the
   Antilles, On the west and on the south, in Mexico, in
   Guatemala, and in Colombia, the new legislators are
   laboring with zeal to extinguish slavery; and it may
   be hoped that the union of these imperious circum-
   stances will assist the beneficent inteutions of the
   : several European governments, who wish to improve
   continually the condition of the slaves; for the fear
   of danger will force those concessions which the
   eternal principles of justice and humanity demand.
      J. C. DERBY’S
  RECENT PUBLICATIONS.
    I      -
       TEE WIDOW REDOTT PAPERS : Containing, also, the Experiences of Aunt
           Maguire. Edited by Alice IS. Neal. With eight humorous illustrations by
           Dallas and On*. 12mo. .                                                       $1 25
       MARRIED, NOT MATED. A Noyel. By          Alice Carey,......................1    25
       WINNIE AND I. A Novel. 12mo.           ................................... .   1 00
       ISORA’S CHILD. A Novel. 12mo.         .  .  . ■ .    . '   .  .    .       .125
       CAMP FIRES OF THE RED MEN.           By J. R. Orton, M.D. 12mo. Illustrated, . 1 25
       PEN PICTURES OF THE BIBLE. By Charles Bkeoiier. First Series: David
           and his Throne. Uniform with u Sunny Side,” .                                50
       COUNTRY MARGINS, AND SUMMER RAMBLES. By Hammond and Mansfield, 1 00
       SIMM’S LIFE OF OENERAL MARION. 12mo. DIustrated,..............................1 25
       LIVES OF THE SIGNERS OF THE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE.
           Illustrated, 12mo.,..................................................  .   1 25
       LAYARD’S POPULAR DISCOVERIES AT NINEVEH. 12mo. Illustrations, . 1 00
       HOWE’S EMINENT MECHANICS. 12mo. DIustrated,....................................  25
       STEPHENS’ INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL IN EGYPT AND THE HOLY LAND. A
           new edition. 8vo. Illustrated,............................................2 00
         The Same, 2 yoIs., 12mo.,.................................................. 2 00
       HANNAH MORE’S COMPLETE WORKS. 2 vols.,........................................8 00
       PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. A fine edition, with fifty elegant engravings. 12mo., .      75
     MISS SEDGWICK’S WORKS. 8 vols.> viz.:
        REDWOOD. 12mo.,       .
        CLARENCE. “             ....
        A NEW ENGLAND TALE, 12mo., .
        40
j. c. derby's recent publications.
     MRS. TUTIIILL’S SUCCESS IN LIFE. 4 volg., 12mo., viz.:
         TUB MECHANIC,.............................
         HIE MERCHANT,            .....................................C8
         THE LAWYER, .         ....................................... 68
         THE ARTIST,            ....................................08
     LANE'S BRIGADE IN MEXICO,.........................................75
     BARNARD’S SCHOOL ARCHITECTURE. 8vo.,.............................2 00
     THE MYSTIC CIRCLE; or, Hand-Book of Masonry,...................1 50
     TAYLOR’S niSTORY OF OHIO. 12mo.,..........................  .  . 1 60
     ECLECTIC PRACTICE OF MEDICINE. By. Drs. Newton and Powbll. 8vom . 4 50
     THE YOUNG WIFE. By Wa. A. Alcott, M.D., .  .    .  .   .    . . 1 00
     THE YOUNG HUSBAND. By Wm. A. Alcott, M.D., .    r  .   .    . . 1 00
     THE YOUNG MOTHER. By Wm. A. Alcott, M.D.,......................1 00
     THE YOUNG HOUSEKEEPER. By Wm. A. Alcott, M.D.,  .  .   .    ,   .100
     THE HOUSE I LIVE IN. By Wm. A. Alcott, M.D.,......................63
     INDIAN NARRATIVES.   12mo.,  ....                                 75
     WEBSTER FAMILY CYCLOPEDIA. 7000 Receipts, 100 Engravings, . .  . 8 00
     ILLUSTRATED LIFE OF FRANKLIN. 8vo.,............................2 00
     DON QUIXOTE. A new edition, cloth, 12mo., . ...................1 25
     GIL BLAS. A new edition, 12mo....................  .   .       . 1 25
     THE HEART OF MABEL WARE. A Novel. 12mo.,      .'   .           . 1 00
               ROORBACH’S BOOKSELLERS’ TRADE LIST,
    Containing a Complete Catalogue of American Publications from 1820 to
    1852. Price $5, net. Every Bookseller in the land should possess it.
    Not only is the name of each book given, but the Publisher and the Price.
    Well studied, it will make a complete Bookseller of the uninitiated.
  I
J. c. derby’s publications.
 LIST OF POPULAR BOOKS
       FOE AGENTS.
  FLORA’S INTERPRETER. Edited by Sarah  J. Hale. 12mo(| .    .     .  .$125
  GREEN MOUNTAIN BOYS. By D. P. Thomson. 12mo.,......................1 00
  TIIE RANGERS. By the Author of M Green Mountain Boys.’* 12mo., . .   .100
  MAY MARTIN. By the same. 12mo.,  .       .                            100
  COMBE ON THE CONSTITUTION #P MAN. 12mo.,...............................75
  MECHANIC’S OWN BOOK. 12mo..........................................1  00
  ETHAN ALLEN ; oh, Tiie Green Mountain  Heroes. 12mo., .    .     . . 1 25
  UPS AND DOWNS; or, Silver Lake Sketches. By Cousin Cicely. 12mo., . 1 25
  LEWIE; or, Tiie Bended Twiq. By Same,..............................1 00
  ALONE. By the Author of “ Hidden Path.” 12mo., . .       . .     . . 1 25
  WESTERN SCENES AND ADVENTURES. 12rao.,.        . .         .     . . 1 25
  SALT WATER BUBBLES; or, Life on tub    Wave. l2mo.,   . .        .   .125
  HALL’S LEGENDS OF THE WEST. 12mo.,................................  1 25
  THE WIDE WIDE WOULD. By Elizabeth Wbtiikrkll.    2  vols., .     . . 1 50
  tyHEKOHY. By the author of «Wide Wide World.” 2 vols., . . . > .   . 1 75
  MR. RUTHERFORD’S CHILDREN. lGrao., By the Same,........................75
  HUMANITY IN TIIE CITY. By Rev. E. II. CuAPlN. 12mo.,...............1 00
                                        N         ’
  MRS. SIGOURNEY’S SELECT POEMS. 12mo„...............................1 25
  MRS. SIGOURNEY’S SAYINGS FOR 'HIE LITTLE ONES. lGrao., ...             75
  D’AUBIGN^l’S HISTORY OF PROTESTANTS. 12mo.,     .     .    ...     . 1 25
  FERN LEAVES. By Fanny Fern. First Series,.........................  1 25
   Do. do.         do.   do.  Second Series,..................... , 1 25
  HOME SCENES AND HOME SOUNDS. By Mrs. Stephens,.....................1 00
  LITTLE CROSS BEARERS. By Miss Chrsebro’,...............................50
  THE WORKS OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS. 8vo.,............................. , 1 25
  FAMILY QUARTO "BIBLE, Plain sheep,...................................  00
   Do.     do.     do.   A. P. O. marble edges,            . . . , , . 8 50
   Do.     do.     do.   A. P. C. gilt edges, .                           5 00
      44
j. c. Derby’s recent publications.
         TWO NEW BOOKS BY PETER PARLEY!
          THE BALLOON TRAVELS OF ROBERT
          MFRRY
            AND HIS YOUNG FRIENDS OVER VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF EUROPE.
            Edited by Peter Parley.
                    With 8 Original Designs. Beautiful 12mo. $1 00.
                              TIIE
        VOYAGES, TRAVELS, AND ADVENTURES
                 OF GILBERT GO-AHEAD, IN FOREIGN PARTS.
                         Edited by Peter Farley.
                 With 8 Original Designs. Be^itiful 12mo. $1 00.
                       ALSO, NEARLY READY.,
            GREEN MOUNTAIN GIRDS,
                         A TALE OF VERMONT,
                       One neat 12mo. PHce $1 00.
                THE LOST HUNTER,
           '       A TALE OF EARLY TIMES.
                            12mo.) U 25.
             THE CREOLE ORPHANS,
                        A TALE OF LOUISIANA.
                            12mo., $1 25.
           TWO STANDARD HISTORIES FOR EVERY LIBRARY.
           GILLIE S9 HISTORY OF GREECE,
          ITS COLONIES AND CONQUESTS, TO THE DIVISION OF THE MACEDONIAN EMPIRE.
          Including the History of Literature, Philosophy, and the Fine Arts.
                      Complete in one volume. Illustrated, 8vo. $1 75.
            FERGUSON'S HISTORY OF* ROME.
          THE HISTORY OF THE PROGRESS AND TERMINATION OF THE ROMAN‘REFUBI<I0.
                        With a Notice of the Author, by Lord Jeffrey.
                       Uniform vnth GiUdes' History of Greece. $1 75,
j. c. derbt’s publications.
            THE AMERICAN GIFT BOOK;
                               A PERPETUAL SOUVENIR.
      With Six elegant Steel Engravings, viz.: “ The Marriage of Washington,”
     “ Goddess of Liberty,” “ Portrait of Washington,” “ Portrait of Daniel
     Webster,” “Spirit of ’7G,” “Portrait of Martha Washington.” To-
     gether with ■“ Washington’s Farewell Address,” “ Constitution of the
     - United States,” and the “ Declaration of Independence.” Price $1 j
     • cloth, full gilt, $1 50.
        “ The getting-up of this nice volume was a happy thought. It awakens and invigorates
      the noblest patriotic sentiments, and, withal, fortifies patriotism by Bible religion. The
      volume opens with * Washington’s Farewell Address,’ among the richest legacies eYer
      bestowed by a patriot upon his country; and then follows, in prose and poetry, the hap-
      piest and most soul-stirring appeals to the reason and hearts of Americans, warning them
      of the danger of foreign influence adverse to their free institutions, and exoiting to Sleep-
      ,ess vigilance in their perpetuation. The book gives a clear exhibition of what the
      Know-Nothings1 are; allows the necessity for auch an association; and excites an
      earnest hope that they may be preserved and prospered as the life-guard of civil and
      religious liberty.”—OhMian Advocate and Journal.
        “ This is a sterling annual, full of living truth which must be commended by every
      editor who is not a Jesuit at heart, and find a response in the aoul of every lover of
      American soil and institutions. Every page in it is of sterling value, and should be com-
      mitted to memory, and handed down from father to child. The matter in such a book is
      its own best adornment. Washington and the worthies following after him here speak in
      the living present, and poets of the soil set to glowing measure the glories of our Protest-
      ant birlhrigb t.”—Albany Spectator.
        “ We venture to say that so far as the contents are concerned, this gift-book will not
      be excelled by any which will be issued this season. Besides these, there are nearly one
      hundred American articles of a truly American character, many of them written by the
      brightest stars in the splendid galaxy of American Autliors.”— Christian Freeman.
        “ We doubt if in any similar compass of modern literature so many fine thoughts, both
      In poetry and prose, cau be found crowded together. The Webster Hulsemaun letter
      is among the contributions, and some of the best poetry of our patriotic writers.”—i/. K
      Kwprm.
        V We earnestly commend this book, and because it Is a good one—good for the times^
      for the people, and for the American cause. It cannot fail to become a favorite. Let the
      Wide-Awake be foundbefore every American face and eyBoston Bee.
        M The articles are all patriotic effusions, calculated to arouse the true American feeling.
      The K. N.’s will greet with delight the work, and peruse its pages with avidity and
      interest.”— WiUiamsbw'gh Times.
        “ We predict an immense sale for the volume, which is so thoroughly American in
      subject and sentiment, and a product of American talent and genius that will bevdised by
      all true Americans.M-*-i?0fft<m Transcript.
                                                                     23
j. c. Derby's publications.
         A BOOK OF RARE BEAUTY AND GREAT INTEREST.
                                   FOURTH EDITION NOW READY.
                             MRS. OAKES SMITH'S NEW ROMANCE.
                      BERTHA AND LILY;
                                OR, THE PARSONAGE OF BEECH GLEN.
                                   1 elegant I2mo. vol. Price $1.
      The following Dvicf extracts are but the key-notes of lengthy reviews. No recent
     book has received more marked attention from the press:
      11 It compels the reader to linger over its pages.”—N. Y. Tribune.
      “ Sparkling thoughts and humane and benevolent feelings.”—Albany Argus.
      11 More powerfully written than any recent work of fiction.”—N. Y. Day Booh.
      “ Another story of exquisite beauty—graceful and fascinating.”—Phila. News.
      “ Altogether It is a remarkable book.”—N. Y. Christian Enquirer.
      “ No romance more deserves a wide-spread popularity.”—Providence Tost.
      “Striking truths boldly represented.”—Rural New Yorker.
      “ Springing from a heart overflowing with love and sympathy.”—Pittsburg Visitor*
      “Strange scenes, powerful dialogue, and exquisite imagery.”—Transcnpt.
      “ We know of one woman who says it is a brave book,”—Boston Commonwealth,
      “ Elegant with mountain and valley flowers and water lilies.”—N. Y. Dispatch.
      “ Womanly genius under its happiest and purest inspirations.”—Albany Atlas,
      “ A ‘ romance,’ but full of life. It has power; it has truth.”—Boston Bee.
      “ Sure to captivate the reader.”—N. Y. Atlas.
      “The ladies will find it a graceful and fascinating production.”—Phila. City Item,
      “ Just what might be expected from a brilliant woman.”—Albany Express.
      “ A female delicacy of taste and perception.”—Ladies' Repository,
      “ A moral perspective of rare beauty and significance.”—Harpers' Magazine.
      “So intensely interesting, we read it at one sitting.”—Cleveland Farmer,
      “ A ‘prose poem,’ replete with melody and imagery.”—Boston Chronicle.
      “ Well vindicated her reputation as a woman of genius.”—^. Y. herald.
      “ True to nature and every day life.”—Albany Spectator.
      “ Cannot fail to inspire the reader with noble purposes.”—Christian Freeman.
      “ Will be eagerly sought for aDd read.”— Water Ou?'6 Journal.
      “ The Btyle is glowing and impassioned.”—Rochester American,
      “ Its pages leave a very attractive impression.”—Salem Gazette.
      “ Will prove a valuable accession to the home circle.”—Ladies' Enterprise.
      “Will be read, and find many enthusiastic readers.”—Bangor Mercury.
      “ A beautiful creation.”—Boston Transcript.
      “ Comes before the reader with freshness, earnestness and power,”—Eclectic.
      “ The Book before us is bravely written.”—Providence JJna.
      K The very best fiction wc have rpad for years.”—Glen's Fall Republican.
      H Characters in it worthy of lasting fame.”—Hartford Republican,
      ** All her works bear the impress of genius.”—Olive Branch.
      “ It is a beautiful storyT^—Band'ushy Demoorat.

J. c. derby’s publications.
             THE WHITE DOVE, AND OTHER BALLADS
             FOR CHILDREN.
                                BY MBS. X. W. TO WNSBJMJD,
                                           OF PHILADELPHIA.
              16mo., Illustrated. Price, 50 cents ; full gilt sides and edges, 75 cents.
       “Dean Swift, or Sterne, or Doctor Johnson, or somebody else, when in doubt about the
     quality of any new literary effort, used to read it to the housekeeper. If she understood
     and liked it, no doubt it was true to nature. Adopting this pluD, we called up a little boy
     and girl to try this book upon. The boy UuDg himself into a chair and put his leg over
     the arm, as if he expected to be bored. The small damsel took to the rug as for a nap.
     We tried the Snow Storm about Bruno and his children, with success highly flattering
     to the authoress. The small damsel Bat up, pushed back her curls and opened her eyes
     very wide. The boy looked away off out of the window, and swung his cowhide boots
     about as if he didn’t care. But the tears, not few nor Bmali, glistened in the eyes of both,
     We think the book will do.”— Vermont Statesman.
       “ Good rhymes for children are rare indeed, and this will make this elegant little volume
     a welcome addition to the juvenile library. The lady holds a graceful and familiar pen,
     and the children will-know her poems only to love and remember them. Many a boy and
     girl will be happier for its cheerful pictures, pretty thoughts and good sentiments. A book
     liko this is worth a hundred copies of 1 Mother Goose ’ or any of her family. Those who
     would form a taste for good reading in the young, should place such books as tins in their
     hands.”— Worcester Palladium.
       “ The sweetest and happiest productions in that class of writing that we have met with
     for a long time. The conceits are full of the finest and most delicate fancy, and the
     versification is music itself. The narratives are so simple and natural that childhood will
     comprehend and enjoy them, while the delicately-drawn pictures of life and nature possess
     a charm that may well beguile the hours of age.”—If. S. Magazine.
       “ Here’s a nice book for nice little people; full of poetry, pictures and beautiful stories,
     printed in large type, on flue white paper, and bound to be read. Children who Ibvegood
     books will be largely indebted to those who publish such excellent ones as The White
     Dove.”— Gospel Banner.
       “ The writer has succeeded in clothing the purest sentiments in natural and touching
     verse. Loye of nature, and sympathy with the young, have been admirably blended in
     the composition of the volume.”—W. Y. Tribune.
       “ We have looked through them carefully. They are well written—are moral, sensible,
     and noble in their ideas—and they contain nothing to offend any parent's creed, for their
     religiousness is that of every true human heart.”—Boston Post.
       “ Here is a beautiful little volume that will make many a young heart sing for joy, when
     old Santa Claus leaves a copy of it in the stocking In the chimney corner, Dext
     Christmas.”—Maine JFanner.
             M A charming collection'of poems for children—simple, natural, and graphic* such u
             the heart of a child dotes upon.”—N. Y. Independent.
25
J. c. DERBY’S PUBLICATIONS.
                           NEW ENGLAND BOYS;
                                            OR,
                       THE THREE. APPRENTICES.
                                  BY A. I. STINSON.
                      1 elegant 12mo. volume, Illustrated. Price $1 25.
      “ Some of the scenes painted are enough to make ossified hearts quiver. There are
    tempters and temptations; and almost every variety of character is introduced and made
    to play its part, and the description is of the most thrilling nature imaginable. John
    Jiard is a true representative of the Yankee character; the parson’s anecdote of the Ilay
    family, of South Carolina, the wealthy, dissipated young men who were burned in the
    barn because they were too much intoxicated to escape, will do more wherever'read to
    prevent rum-drinking than the ‘ Maine Law.’ It is seldom that we find in a novel so
    many notable characters, and so many good points made as this.”—IltnQham Gazette.
      “ We take pleasure in recommending this work to young men. It points in a most
    powerful manner the road to vice, and warns, most emphatically, those who are in it of
    the fate they may expect if they do not change their tactics. The author very justly
    remarks that in the idle and the Vicious 1 the six degrees of crime’—wine, women,
    gambling, theft, murder, and the gallows—are all attained. The evils of intemperance
    are most powerfully depicted, and the dangers to which that class of young men who are
    known as good-natured jovial fellows are exposed, fully portrayed. The author hafl
    also shown the dangers of relying on circumstantial proof in the conviction of crime,
    llis book should be read by all young men who really desire to escape tho way that leads
    to ignominy and death.”—N. Y. Times.
      “ A temperance book, and is well adapted to impress the lessons of this great reform
    upon every thoughtful mind. It is written with much graphic force, its mo.ral is excellent
    and obvious, and its descriptions of character life-like. We hope it will obtain a wide
    circulation, for its influence must be good.”—Albany Prohibitionist.
      “ A lively, funny, graphic story, which would reflect no discredit upon Dickens. What
    with the fun in the book and the good moral lesson which it conveys, it must have a good
    sale.’Hartford Courant.
      “Full of fun and adventure, inoulcating a wholesome moral, full of stirring incidents,
    by turns humorous or pathetic, and altogether just the book to attract the attention and
    suggest thought.”—N. Y. Allas.
      “ As a matter of pure philanthropy, wo cannot but hope that * Easy Nat * will be able to
    reach 4 Uncle Tom’s Cabin,’ in public favor.V—Boston Citizen.
      “ A hi gill y entertaining work this, and full of the spice, romance and reality of life.
    The style is attractive, the moral excellent.”—Boston Bee.
      “ Tliis is oqe of the books that will sell. It is readable, racy, and written with a good
    moral purpose.”— United States Journal.
      “The story is'one of great interest, truthful and life-like*; the desire to render vice
    odious, and to show how it can be avoided, being apparent in every page.”—Phil, News.
      44 Will make most persons tho better and wiser to read.”—N. Y, Dispatch.
17
J. C. DERBY'S I’UBUCATIONS:
                                                      < '
          THE ENCHANTED BEAUTY
                    AND OTHER TALES, ESSAYS, AND SKETCHES.
                          BY DR, WILLIAM ELDER.
                               12mo, Price $1.
       « Dr. Elder, the author of these extemporaneous sketches, is what Gootho would style a
      many-sided man, lie is a doctor of medicine, a doctor of law—besides being an eloquent
      orator, a ready writer, and one of the best story-tellers that ever beguiled one or more
      friends during a leisure hour.”—Saturday Evening Post.
       “ He gives you his best thoughts sparkling and pure, as a spring throws up its diamonds
     to flash in the sunlight an instant, and then glide away under the bending grass and
     flowers, which cluster round and cover up the source of their brightened colors. He
     Is a singular mixture of the sailor and the diver. One moment he is skimming over
     the surface of events like the merest trifler, or a sea-gull on the waves; and in an instant,
     perhaps before lie finishes the sentence, he is down iuto the bidden mysteries of nature,
     and has drugged up something which looks wondrously like a useless pebble, but forthwith
     he applies the keen edge of analysis, and lo 1 you have a pearl, which you stop to look at
     again and again, and put away in the casket of memory for future ornament or use.”—
     Saturday Visitor.
       “All who have ever heard Dr. Elder speak, and there are many here to whom the
     memory of his eloquence is a pleasant one, cannot fail to recognize the man in this book.
     He used to talk like a book, and the book taHcs like him. As a speaker he enjoyed a rare
     reputation in his speaking days; and although in these sketches we miss the aid of his
     expressive face, which gave so much zest to his elocution, it is impossible not to recognize
     the same brilliant fancy, beauty of illustration and wealth of language, which gave their
     author so much character in his younger days.”—Pittsburg Gazette.
      “ A large circle of readers will be attracted to this volume by the name of its author.
    He holds a prominent rank among the advocates of popular, or rather unpopular, reforms.
    Most of the progressive piovements of the day have found in him an enthusiastic
    champion. He has labored largely and spoken well for freedom, temperance, *and social
    justice. The ring of his sympathetic voice still echoes in the ears of multitudes who have
    listened to his earnost pleadings. The cause of httmanity Is indebted to his active fancy
    and fluent rhetoric.”—JV. Y. Tribune.
      “ We doubt if a more entertaining volume has ever issued from the press. There is
    something in it for each reader—every taste is nppoaled to—from grave to gay, lively to
    severe. What we chiefly like in Dr. Elder, is his conscientious sincerity—the simplicity
    and purity of his style—a perpetual flow of felicitous language—a straight-forward
    manliness and dignity and earnestness—a habit of telling the truth, because of his love
    of truth—a sovereign contempt for indirection of all kinds—a genially, always hearty,
    because natural.”—Philadelphia Oily Item.
     “Dr. Elder is one of the wittiest, jolliest, and the most gonial of philanthropists, who
    never permits Ids prejudices, if he has any, to interfere with his humor, and always looks
    on the bright side of things while exhibiting tlieir dark sides. He is racy in his style,
    reliable in his facts, ingenious in his humor, and liberal in his principles.”—N. Y. Swiday
    Courier.
                                                                     97
J. C. DERBY'S PUBLICATIONS.
       GREECE AND THE GOLDEN HORN
              A RECORD #F ORIENTAL TRAVELS IN GREECE AND TURKEY.
                    BY THE LATE STEPHEN OLJN} H. Z>., LL. D.
                WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY REV. J. MC CUNTOCK, D.D.
       1 elegant 12mo. voL, with 4 Illustrations and a Map of Constantinople.
        Price $1.
        “ Peculiar interest attaches to this volume, not only on account of its subject, which is
      at the present juncture one of the most important that engages public attention, but also
      on account of its being a posthumous work of a very great ami good man, whose decease
      Is still deeply lamented by a large branch of the Church. The Rev. Dr. 01 in made
      provision in his will that, “ in case he left no children, the copyright of his * Travels in the
      East' should be given to the Wesleyan University at Middletown ; and moreover, that on
      the death of Mrs. Olin, and in default of children to inherit, the whole of his property
      should fall to the University. His wife and son survive him, but the present volume is
      dedicated, in the spirit of his last yrtll, to the object he so dearly cherished. The whole
      profits of the book will accrue to the Wesleyan University, to whose trustees the copyright
      has been assigned.” This statement iB derived from Dr. McClintock; but we add that
      the attractions of the book are sufficient to merit aud secure the attention of the public,
      without any adventitious interest. Dr. Oliu’s fine powers of description were stimulated
      to their highest exertion by his tom’ through classic and Oriental regions, and all that he
      observed is depicted to the mind of the reader in truthful colors. The introduction has
      been prepared by Dr. McClintock with great ability, and with that thorough mastery of
      his theme which usually characterizes Ids writings.”—N. Y. Commercial Advertiser.
        “ Whoever has read Dr. Olin’s volumes, containing an account of his travels in the
      East, will need no other inducement to place this additional one in his library. The
      countries it describes are not less interesting in their history, than the monuments of the
      arts and sciences which they retain even in their ruins, and Dr. Olin possessed in great
      excellence that graphic power which presents things in their reulities to au attentive
      reader. Withal, we know whit he writes is always true. He was too conscientious to
      indulge his imagination, vivid as it was, at the expense of truth. We may safely rely,
      botli upon his statements, and his descriptions, in which regard travellers Are proverbially
      p^one to exaggeration, if not to fanciful creations of their own. The deep concern in
      the public mind which recent occurrences in the East have enkindled, cannot fall to create
      a general desire to read this volume, which we assure our friends will abundantly repay
      tiie perusal.”—Christian Advocate and Journal.
        “ Thankfully, but mournfully, will it be received and read. Thousands who remember
      the peerless mind and majestic form of the author, will recognize in these pages tho
      tracings of his masterly hand. * * * * * * it has been highly gratifying to us to
      read this last and unexpected work from the gifted and sainted Olin. He has 1 fallen
      asleep,’ but his memory will be devoutly cherished by the thnusnnds that knew him.
      Apart from recollections of this kind, tho volume is worthy of attention, and we predict
      Unit few who begin to read It will wish to stop till they have read it through.” —Northern
      ChrUHan Advocate
19